--- PAGE 1 ---
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/274375961
EVALUATING PORE SPACE CONNECTIVITY BY NMR DIFFUSIVE COUPLING
Conference Paper · May 2014
CITATIONS
3
READS
155
9 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
NMR Applications View project
Postdoctoral research in Nonextensive Statistical Mechanics View project
Giovanna Carneiro
Schlumberger Limited
24 PUBLICATIONS   211 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Andre Souza
Schlumberger Servicos de Petroleo Ltda.
41 PUBLICATIONS   577 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Austin Boyd
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
73 PUBLICATIONS   588 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Willian A. Trevizan
Petróleo Brasileiro S.A.
16 PUBLICATIONS   93 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Bernardo Coutinho on 15 March 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- PAGE 2 ---
SPWLA 55th Annual Logging Symposium, May 18-22, 2014 
1 
EVALUATING PORE SPACE CONNECTIVITY BY NMR DIFFUSIVE 
COUPLING 
Giovanna Carneiro, Andre Souza, Austin Boyd, Schlumberger Brazil Research and Geoengineering Center 
Lawrence Schwartz, Yi-Qiao Song, Schlumberger-Doll Research Center, Rodrigo Azeredo, Fluminense Federal 
University, Willian Trevizan, Bernardo Santos, Edmilson Rios, Vinicius Machado, Petrobras Research and 
Development Center. 
Copyright 2014, held jointly by the Society of Petrophysicists and Well Log 
Analysts (SPWLA) and the submitting authors. 
This paper was prepared for presentation at the SPWLA 55th Annual Logging 
Symposium held in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, May 18-22, 2014. 
ABSTRACT 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measure -
ments have been used as a way to evaluate 
reservoir rocks based, on the longitudinal and 
transverse relaxation time s, T1 and T2, and the time 
dependent diffusion coefficient , D(t). Relaxation 
time distributions can be related to pore sizes and 
to the free and bound fluid fraction s. In addition, 
there are well established equations correlating 
relaxation times to permeability. Regarding 
diffusion, a t short times D(t) is linked to the pore 
volume to surface area ratio while at long times it 
is related to pore tortuosity. Diffusive coupling 
between pores complicates the interpretation of 
NMR measurements because the relaxation time 
distribution will no longer be an accurate 
representation of the pore size distribution . On the 
other hand, analyzing the effects of diffusive 
coupling can provide inform ation about 
connectivity within the pore space. In particular, 
knowing whether the macro -pores are connected 
to each other or are connected only through the 
micro-pores would provide valuable insight 
regarding the permeability. 
In this work a low -field NMR spectrometer is 
employed to the NMR response of a micro-porous 
borosilicate glass bead pack. This material is a 
good representat ion of bimodal porosity systems. 
It c onsists of spherical grains with a mean 
diameter of 150 µm; each of these grains is, itself, 
porous with an average micro -pore diameter of 0.3 
µm. The system’s total porosity is 80% and is 
divided equally between the micro - and macro -
pores. Numerical simulations using three 
dimensional models incorporate the effec ts of 
diffusive coupling between micro - and macro -
porosity and thus support the interpretation of our 
measurements. Our experimental results show 
clear evidence of inter -pore diffusion and, 
therefore, add new information to conventional 
one-dimensional studies. 
We have also applied this methodology to evaluate 
diffusion and connectivity in sedimentary rocks. 
Image analysis of thin sections provided the 
geometric parameters that were used as inputs to 
the computational models . Once again, we were 
able to simulate the N MR response and obtain 
good agreement with l ow-field NMR 
measurements. 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of NMR as a tool to evaluate porous 
media dates back to the early days of the 
technique. In 1956 Varian fil ed a patent describing 
a method to investig ate groundwater in subsurface 
aquifers (Song, 2013) . Later, Browstein and Tarr 
(Brownstein, 1979 ) showed how magnetic 
resonance can probe pore size and shape 
information through di ffusion and relaxation. 
Currently, NMR is one of the main logging tools 
used to evaluate reservoir rocks and is employed 
to estimate porosity, permeability and free and 
bound fluid content. 
NMR measurement s are sensitive to protons in the 
nuclei of hy drogen atoms in fluid saturated porous 
media. In the presence of an applied magnetic 
field, the 1H spins are excited by a radio -frequency 
(rf) pulse. Once the excit ation is over , the spins 
will return to their original state; this process is 
known as relaxation and is described by the 
longitudinal and transversal decay times – T1 and 
T2, respectively. 
Inversion-recovery and the Carr-Purcell-
Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) pulse sequence s are 
commonly employed to measure T1 and T2, 
respectively (Levitt, 2002, Meiboom, 1958) . The 

--- PAGE 3 ---
SPWLA 55th Annual Logging Symposium, May 18-22, 2014 
 
2 
fluid rela xation process in a porous material is 
written as 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
, Eq. 1 
where T1,2,bulk and T1,2,surface are, respectively, the 
bulk and surface contributions to the relaxation. If 
the effects of surface relaxation are relatively weak 
and if diffusion between pores can be neglected 
then the surface contribution to the lifetime can be 
written as 
 
 
 
 
 
, Eq. 2 
where ρ1,2, is the surface relaxivity and S/VP is the 
surface area to pore volume ratio. For brine 
contained in restricted geometries (e.g., the pores 
of reservoir rocks) surface relaxation plays a 
dominant role and the measured T2 distribution can 
provide valuable information about the pore space. 
In the simplest cases o ne might expect that each 
pore would contribute independently to the 
observed magnetization decay. The measured T2 
distribution would then be directly related to the 
distribution of pore sizes. However, experimental 
results show this is not always true. Because of 
diffusion between pores of different sizes, 
relaxation time distribution curves can be quite 
different than the underlying distribution of pore 
sizes (Ramakrishnan, 1999). Therefore, in order to 
estimate pore sizes from NMR responses, this 
phenomenon must be taken into consideration. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATION S 
In order to simulate t he model’s NMR response 
random walk ers are used to represent diffusi ng 
water molecules. Each walker carries a magnetic 
moment that can be relaxed (killed) when the 
walker hits the pore-grain interface. For larger 
pores or vugs the bulk fluid relaxation needs to be 
taken into account as well . A s this mechanism 
depends only on the type of saturating fluid but not 
on the diffusion time, it can be included at the final 
step. 
The method applied in this study makes use of 
variable step size random walks (Zhang et al, 
2011). For dual porosity systems (such as reservoir 
rocks with large range of pore sizes) using a fixed 
step size algorithm would be prohibitively 
inefficient because the step size would have to be 
small compared to the size of the throats in the 
smallest pores. In our variable step size algorithm, 
the step size is defined as the radius R of the 
largest sphere that can be drawn around the walker 
without intersecting the pore wall. The walker 
goes to a random point in the surface of this sphere 
and the walker’s clock advances by R2/(6D0), 
where D0 is the saturating fluid diffusion 
coefficient. Once more, the radius of the largest 
sphere is determined and the walker steps 
randomly. The procedure is repeated until the 
walker reaches a distance δR to the pore wall, 
where the algorithm will change into a fixed step 
size walk. Once inside this shell of width δR, the 
walker will have two possibilities: stepping until it 
passes out of the shell and then returns to the 
variable step algorithm, or stepping until it hits the 
pore wall (inside the macro - or micro-pore space). 
When the walker hits the wall it has a probability, 
γ [0 < γ < 1], of dying (relaxing). γ is related to the 
surface relaxivity, ρ 1,2, and the diffusion 
coefficient, D0, according to 
 
 
 
 , Eq. 3 
where, ε is the step size when the walker is within 
the layer of width δR. The time at which the 
walker dies is recorded and another walker is 
released at a random location in the pore space. 
MICRO-POROUS GLASS BEADS 
Micro-porous glass beads are a good physica l 
model for dual porosity systems (Figure 1) , such 
as complex reservoir rocks. These are a 
commercial material used in liquid 
chromatography and are easily found in different 
grain sizes. We have selecte d borosilicate beads 
with a mean diameter of 150 µm. The system’s 
total porosity is 80% which is equally divided 
between micro - and macro -porosity. According to 
the manufacturer’s specifications, the system’s 
pore volume to surface area ratio is VP/S = 0.31 
m. 
The packed micro -porous beads were saturated 
with water and experiments were carried out to 
measure the T2 relaxation spectrum and time 
dependent diffusion coefficient , D(t). Measure-
ments were carried out in a Magritek Inc. Rock 

--- PAGE 4 ---
SPWLA 55th Annual Logging Symposium, May 18-22, 2014 
3 
Core Analyzer operating at 2.01 MHz. For the T2 
measurement, a CPMG experiment with 64 scans, 
1024 echoes and 400 µs echo spacing was 
performed. T o measure D(t) a pulsed -field 
gradient stimulated echo ( Tanner, 1970 ) was 
employed. G radient pulses were applied for 4 ms, 
the gradient strength was varied from 0 to 45 G/cm 
and diffusion times, t, ranged from 12 to 100 ms. 
 
Fig. 1 Scanning electron microscope image of the 
interior of the micro -porous glass beads used in 
this study. (Millipore.com, 2014) 
For the first tests on simulating the system’s NMR 
response, the Micro-Grain Consolida tion (µ -GC) 
model ( Ramakrishnan, 1999, Zhang, 2011) was 
used. This model is based on a three -dimensional 
packing of overlapping spheres which are, in turn, 
comprised of m icro-spheres ( Figure 2 ). This 
allows us to represent mixed -porosity systems, 
such as rocks with bimodal pore size distributions. 
The grains are arranged on a cubic lattice and by 
adjusting the radius of the macro and micro -
spheres (i.e., the degree of overlap) one can 
control the macro - and micro -porosity of the 
system. The center to center distance can also be 
changed and is related to the over -all pore size. A 
scale factor controls the mismatch betw een the 
macro- and micro-grids. 
 
Fig. 2 Micro-Grain Consolidation model. On the 
left, the three -dimensional packing of macro -
grains and, on the right, the unit cell and the 
micro-spheres contained within each macro-grain. 
However, the simulation results did not match the 
measured D(t) data. (Figure 3). From the scanning 
electron microscope image shown in Fig ure 1 
(Millipore.com, 2014 ) it is clear that the micro -
porous region is not well represented by 
overlapping grains. As an alternative, we 
proposed a Swiss Cheese geometry in which the 
micro-porous region is represented in terms of 
overlapping spherical pores (rather than grains). 
Calculations based in this model yielded much 
better results (Figure 3). 
 
Fig. 3 Experimental and simulated diffusion 
coefficients ( D) for diffe rent diffusion times ( t). 
The red dots are the experimental data, with t 
ranging from 12 to 100 ms. The blue and black 
lines are the simulated data, the black line is the 
result from the µ -GC model (with spherical micro -
grains) and the blue line is the res ult from the 
Swiss Cheese geometry (spherical micro-pores). 
The Swiss Cheese geometry was also used to 
calculate t he T1 and T2 lifetime distributions. In 
these calculations the values of 1 and 2 were 
adjusted to give the best fit and we see from 
Figure 4 that the comparison to the measured 
distributions is quite good. Both the experimental 
and simulated magnetization data were processed 
with a Fast Laplace Inversion algorithm (Song, 
2002) to produce the T2 distribution curves. 
One feature of the distri butions shown in Fig. 4 is 
quite important. Even though the micro - and 
macro-pores represent equal volumes, the T2 
distribution does not show two peaks with equal 
weight. Indeed, this is the signature of diffusion 
between the two sub -populations in the p ore space 
Unit Cell
Micro-porous 
grains

--- PAGE 5 ---
SPWLA 55th Annual Logging Symposium, May 18-22, 2014 
 
4 
(Ramakrishnan, 1999). Note that for the T1 
distribution there is only a single broadened peak; 
looking only at this distribution one would not 
suspect the presence of two pore populations. 
 
Fig. 4 Experimental (full lines ) and calculated 
(dashed lines ) T2 (blue lines) and T1 
(red lines) 
spectrum for the micro-porous glass beads. A very 
good agreement between the data is observed. 
In the next paragraphs, we describe the application 
of numerical simulations to the original µ-GC 
model (with spherical micro-grains) to 
sedimentary rocks. 
IMAGE ANALYSIS 
The geometrical parameters used as input to the µ-
GC model are obtained through image analysis of 
thin sections. For each sample to be tested, a 
picture of the most representative area of the thin 
section is taken and processed. First, the visible 
macro-porosity (blue area) is counted and then 
micro-porosity is estimated by comparing this 
value to the gas porosity data. A binary image is 
created with the thin section pictures and grain and 
 
Fig. 5 On the left, the original thin section picture 
of the Silurian dolomite rock, where the blue area 
is the blue epoxy filled porosity. O n the right, the 
binary image extracted used to measure pore sizes , 
with pores in black. 
pore siz es and aspect ratios are measured. In 
Figure 5 it is shown the binary image for 
evaluating the pores extracted from the thin 
section for the Silurian sample. 
ROCK SAMPLES 
For the samples we have evaluated (Silurian 
Dolomite, Indiana Limestone, Red Massil lon and 
Berea) we have tested only the µ-GC geometry 
with spherical micro -grains. The ρ2 value used for 
the simulations were obtained through a Padé 
fitting of experimental D-T2 maps, as described by 
Souza (Souza, 2013) and are listed in Table 1, 
together with porosity and permeability measured 
for the samples by Helium injection. 
Table 1. Basic properties for the rock samples. 
Sample ρ2 
(µm/s) 
Gas 
porosity 
(p.u.) 
Gas 
permeability 
(mD) 
Silurian 7 18.3 324.4 
Indiana 8 15.1 157.1 
Red 
Massillon 26 22.8 2,641.6 
Berea 16 20.6 238 
 
Before the NMR measurements, the samples were 
saturated with a 50,000 ppm KCl brine. In a Maran 
Ultra by Oxford Instruments (UK), operating at a 
Larmor frequency of 2 MHz for 1H, CPMG 
experiments were carried out with an echo spacing 
time of 400 µs and the acquisition of 32 scans. The 
resulting decay curves were processed following the 
same procedure as for the glass beads. 
In our numerical simulations the gas porosity and the 
surface relaxivity values, ρ2, were kept fixed for each 
sample. Given the value of ρ2 we estimated the size 
of the micro-pores. The macro-pore dimensions and, 
if necessary, the weighting of micro - and macro -
porosity were then varied to get the best agreeme nt 
with the measured T2 distributions. We found that the 
micro- and macro-porosities obtained from the thin 
section images could not be used directly in the 
simulations. This may be a consequence of the 
relatively small area covered by the images. The 
values of macro-porosity used in the simulations are 
compared to those derived from image analysis in 
Table 2. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
SPWLA 55th Annual Logging Symposium, May 18-22, 2014 
5 
 
Fig. 6 Overlap of experimental and simulated T2 
distributions for the four rocks analyzed. The 
match between the measured and calculated data is 
quite satisfactory. 
Table 2. Total porosity and macro -porosity 
fraction determined by Image Analysis and by the 
simulations for the four samples. 
Sample 
Total 
porosity 
(p.u.) 
Macro-porosity 
fraction (p.u.) 
Image 
Analysis Simulation 
Silurian 18.3 8.0 8.1 
Indiana 15.1 3.4 7.5 
Red 
Masillon 22.8 15.7 11.5 
Berea 20.6 8.8 10.2 
 
The magnetization decay curves obtained from the 
simulations were processed as before to get T2 
distributions. A comparison of the experimental and 
calculated distributions is shown in Figure 6. 
Generally the agreement is quite satisfactory. We 
note that in all cases the T2 distributions have a 
distinct short time component representing the 
micro-porosity. However, comparing the area under 
the micro-porosity part of the distribution with the 
numbers presented in Table 2, we see that in all four 
cases there is clear evidence for coupling between 
the micro- and macro-pores. Indeed, the behavior of 
these rocks is qualitatively similar to micro -porous 
glass bead results shown in Fig. 4. In all four rocks 
the fraction of micro-porosity is roughly 50% but the 
area under the short time feature of the T2 
distributions is considerably smaller. 
To further illustrate this point, we can repeat the 
simulations with a barrier that separates the micro- 
and macro-pores and eliminates diffusi on between 
these populations. Results for the Indiana limestone 
are presented in In Fig. 7. If we measure to the left 
and right of the minimum in the barrier distribution, 
we see that the areas under the micro- and macro-
peaks are now roughly equal. In addition, the 
position of the macro -peak has shifted to longer 
times. By contrast, the position of the micro-peak is 
essentially unchanged; most of the micro -pore 
relaxation occurs deep within the large micro-porous 
grain and is unaffected by the barrier. This shift 
implies that estimating pore sizes directly from the 
NMR T2 distribution can be difficult because 
diffusive coupling shifts the position of the peak that 
represents the larger pores. This point is reinforced if 
we compare the T2 distribution with MICP data (Fig. 
8) for Indiana limestone. The MICP measurements 
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
T2 (s)
Amplitude (a.u.)
 
 
Experimental
Simulation
Berea
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
T2 (s)
Amplitude (a.u.)
 
 
Experimental
Simulation
Red Massillon
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
T2 (s)
Amplitude (a.u.)
 
 
Experimental
Simulation
Silurian
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
T2 (s)
Amplitude (a.u.)
 
 
Experimental
Simulation
Indiana

--- PAGE 7 ---
SPWLA 55th Annual Logging Symposium, May 18-22, 2014 
 
6 
clearly indicate that, in the T2 distribution, the large 
pores are shifted to smaller lengths. These 
considerations are especially relevant because it is 
the large pores that are most important in estimating 
permeability. 
 
Fig. 7 For Indiana Limestone the measured T2 
distribution is compared to two simulations, one of 
which eliminate diffusive coupling. 
 
Fig. 8 For Indiana limestone we use ρ2 to 
transform the time scale for the experimental T2 
distribution to a pore radius (radius=2. ρ2.T2) and 
then compare to MICP data (both areas are 
normalized to 1). 
CONCLUSIONS 
The µ-GC model together with random walk 
simulations is able to represent the essential 
features of the measured NMR properties of the 
different systems, both synthetic and natural, we 
have investigated here. Our results indicate that 
diffusive coupling (i.e., di ffusion between large 
and small pores) is important in all these systems. 
In subsequent work we will develop per meability 
models that take account of the linkage between 
micro- and macro-pores in these complex systems. 
REFERENCES 
Brownstein, K.R. and Tarr, C.E., 1979, importance 
of classical diffusion in NMR studies of water in 
biological cells: Physical Review A, 19, 2446-2453. 
Levitt, M.H., 2002, spin dynamics: basics of nuclear 
magnetic resonance: John Wiley and Sons LTD. 
Meiboom, S. and Gil, D., 1958, modified spin-echo 
method for measuring nuclear relaxation times: 
Review of Scientific Instruments, 29, 688-691. 
Millipore.com., 2014. CPG - Millipore. [online] 
Available at: 
http://www.millipore.com/catalogue/item/cpg3000bkg 
[Accessed: Jan 2014] 
Ramakrishnan, T.S., Schwartz, L.M., Fordham, E.J., 
Kenyon, W.E., Wilkinson, D.J., 1999, forward 
models for nuclear magnetic resonance in carbonate 
rocks: The Log Analyst, 40, 260-270. 
Song, Y.-Q., Venkataramanan, L., Hürilimann, M. 
D., Flaum, M., Frulla, P. and Straley, C., 2002 T1-T2 
correlation spectra obtained using a fast two -
dimensional Laplace inversion: Journal of Magnetic 
Resonance, 154, 261-268. 
Song, Y .-Q., 2013, magnetic resonance of porous 
media (MRPM): a perspective: Journal of Magnetic 
Resonance, 229, 12-24. 
Souza. A., Carneiro, G., Zielinski, L., Polinski, R., 
Schwartz, L., Hurlimann, M., Boyd, A., Rios, E.H., dos 
Santos, B.C.C., Trevizan, W.A., Machado, V.F., 
Azeredo, R.B.V., 2013, permeability prediction 
improvement using 2D NMR diffusion -T2 maps: In 
SPWLA 54th annual logging symposium. 
Tanner, J.E, 1970, u se of the stimulate d echo in 
NMR diffusion studies: Journal of Chemical Physics, 
52, 2523-2526. 
Zhang, Z., Johnson, D.L. and Schwartz, L.M., 2011 
simulating the time -dependent diffusion coefficient 
in mixed-pore-size materials. Physical Review E, 84, 
031129. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
SPWLA 55th Annual Logging Symposium, May 18-22, 2014 
7 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Giovanna Carneiro 
Giovanna Carneiro is a Research Associate at 
Schlumberger Brazil Research and Geoengineering 
Center. She has a M .S. in Chemistry from Federal 
University of Espirito Santo, Brazil, and is currently a 
Ph.D. student at Chemistry Department at Federal 
Fluminense University. Giovanna joined Schlumberger 
in 2011 as an intern at Schlumberger -Doll Research in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Andre Souza 
Andre Souza is a Research Associate at Schlumberger 
Brazil Research and Geoengineering Center. Andre has 
a M.S. and a Ph.D. in Material Science and Engineering 
from University of Sao Paulo, and a B .S. in 
Engineering Physics from Federal University of Sao 
Carlos. Andre joined Schlumberger in 2010 as an intern 
at Schlumberger -Doll Research in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Austin Boyd 
Austin Boyd is currently Petrophysics Program 
Manager at Schlumberger Brazil Research and 
Geoengineering Center, in Rio de Janeiro. Prior to 
moving to Brazil, he was Program Manager for 
Petrophysics at Schlumberger -Doll Research. Before 
moving to research, he held a variety of positions in 
interpretation development in the US and the Middle 
East. He joined Schlumberger in 1981 as a fie ld 
engineer after receiving a B.S. in Electrical Engineering 
from Dalhousie University. 
Lawrence Schwartz 
Lawrence Schwartz joined Schlumberger -Doll 
Research in 1982. He retired in 2009 and has remained 
with the company as a consultant working on modeling 
petrophysical properties. Dr. Schwartz began his career 
as a professor in the Physics Department at Brandeis 
University. He holds a Ph.D. from Harvard University 
and a B.S. from the City College of New York. 
Yi-Qiao Song 
Yi-Qiao Song joined Schlumberger -Doll Research in 
1997. He is currently a Scientific Advisor and Manager 
of NMR and Fluid Analysis. Dr. Song has served as a 
Consulting Faculty member at Stanford University and 
as a Miller Fellow at the University of California 
Berkeley. He has a Ph.D. from Northwestern 
University and a B.S. from Peking University in China. 
Rodrigo Bagueira de Vasconcellos Azeredo 
Rodrigo Bagueira de Vasconcellos Azeredo is a 
Professor in the Chemistry Department at Federal 
Fluminense University in Niteroi, Rio de Janeir o. He 
has a M .S. and a Ph .D. in Analytical Chemistry from 
University of Sao Paulo, and a B .S. of Chemical 
Engineering from Fluminense Federal University. 
Professor Rodrigo worked for Petrobras Research 
Center (CENPES) from 2002 to 2004, before his 
current position as a professor. 
Edmilson Helton Rios 
Edmilson Helton Rios has been working as a 
petrophysicist for three years at the Petrobras Research 
and Development Center (CENPES) in Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil. He received a BSc degree in applied physics 
(2009) from the Federal University of Minas Gerais 
(UFMG), Brazil. He also holds an MSc degree in 
geophysics (2011) from the National Observatory 
(ON), Brazil, where he is currently a PhD candidate. 
Bernardo Coutinho Camilo dos Santos 
Bernardo Coutinho Camilo dos Santos joined Petrobras 
in 2010 as a geophysicist and since 2011 works at 
Petrobras Research and Development Center 
(CENPES). He has a Ph.D. in Physics from Federal 
Fluminense University in Niteroi, Rio de Janeiro. 
Willian Andrighetto Trevizan 
Willian Andrighetto Trevizan is a geophysicist at 
Petrobras Research and Development Center 
(CENPES). He has a M .S. in Physics from Physics 
Institute of Sao Carlos, University of Sao Paulo, and is 
currently a Ph.D. student at the same Institute. 
Vinícius de França Machado 
Vinícius de França Machado is the Rock Log Seismic 
Integration Manager at the Petrobras Research Center 
(CENPES) in Rio de Janeiro. He has a joint M.S. from 
the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro and the 
University of Texas at Austin, and a B.S. in Civil 
Engineering from the Rio de Janeiro State University. 
He joined Petrobras in 2002. 
View publication statsView publication stats