--- PAGE 1 ---
PHYSICAL REVIEW B VOLUME 44, NUMBER 14 1 OCTOBER 1991-II
Magnetization evolution in connected yore systems
K. R. Mccall
Schlumberger Dol-l Research, Old Quarry Road, Ridgefteld, Connecticut 06877
and Department ofPhysics and Astronomy, Uniuersity ofMassachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003
D. L. Johnson
Schlumberger Doll -Research, Old Quarry Road, Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877
R. A. Guyer
Department ofPhysics and Astronomy, Uniuersity ofMassachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003
(Received 5 April 1991;revised manuscript received 8 July 1991)
The equations governing magnetization evolution in Quid-filled pore systems are developed. Particu-
lar attention is given to the eQ'ect of coupling between pores. In pore systems with a range of pore sizes
(and/or decay rates}, the evolution of the total dipole moment is described exactly by a spectrum of de-
cay rates, leading to multiple-exponential decay. We study this spectrum of decay rates as a function of
coupling strength between pores, using perturbation theory, e8'ective-medium theory, and matrix diago-
nalization. The spectrum of decay rates evolves from the individual pore decay-rate distribution, at zero
coupling, to a 5-function distribution, at infinite coupling. The development of the spectrum of decay
rates between the two extremes of weak and strong coupling is discussed. The three methods employed
to study this problem are in good agreement. The e8'ect of coupling between pores is important in NMR
measurements when comparing di6'erent porous materials and in the study of the temperature depen-
dence of characteristic decay rates in these materials.
I. INTRODUCTION
Porous-media systems consist of matrix, pore Quid, and
probe particle. For example, in water saturated fused
glass beads, the glass matrix is complementary to the
pore space which is filled with weakly ionized water. In
an electrical measurement the probe particle is an ion,
e.g., Na+, which probes the pore space as a participant in
the current carrying process. In an NMR measurement,
the probe particle is the H atom on a water molecule, the
carrier of a H nuclear magnetic moment. This molecule
explores the pore space by di6'usive motion. The magnet-
ic moment it carries relaxes due to dipolar interactions
with other molecules and interactions at the pore-
Quid —matrix interface. The magnetization evolves by
diffusive motion and relaxation processes. It responds to
features of the geometry of the pore space. We are in-
terested in the geometrical information which may be
garnered from NMR studies of magnetization evolution.
Brownstein and Tarr, ' in a classic work, have discussed
magnetization evolution in independent pores. Our in-
terest is in magnetization evolution in coupled-pore sys-
tems. We take the characteristics of the diffusive motion
and the relaxation mechanisms to be known and concern
ourselves with geometry. The geometry of the pore sys-
tem we wish to study is that of a lattice of pores (e.g.,
sites characterized by volume and surface) connected by
throats (e.g., bonds characterized by cross-sectional area).
See Fig. 1. Thus, we describe the pore space with a set of
geometrical parameters: V the volume of a pore; A the
surface area of a pore; S the cross-sectional area of a
throat; and l the distance between the center of adjacent
pores. In addition, we defi.ne a pore size a, where
a = V/A.
The behavior of magnetization in a pore space is con-
trolled by four rates.
(1) to~ =1/T, tt, the bulk relaxation rate, an intrinsic
property of ihe pore Quid.
(2) w =p/a, the relaxation rate in the vicinity of the
fiuid-matrix interface. [p=d(l/r — 1/T, ~), where d is
the thickness of the Quid layer next to the matrix walls
FIG. 1. Schematic of a porous-medium cross-sectional area.
The porous medium is characterized by large voids, each as-
signed a volume V and surface area A, connected by narrow
channels of cross-sectional area S. The distance between pores
is I and a = V/A.
O~1991 The American Physical Society

--- PAGE 2 ---
MAGNETIZATION EVOLUTION IN CONNECTED PORE SYSTEMS 7345
which is influenced by the matrix and ~ is the relaxa-
tion rate of Quid in d. Thus, p has units of a velocity and
characterizes how well the matrix relaxes the fiuid in con-
tact with it.]
(3) wz =D/a, the rate of molecular diffusion to the
fiuid-matrix interface (D is the bulk Quid diffusion
coefficient).
(4) w, =SD/Vl, the rate of molecular diffusion between
pores, the interpore coupling rate.
The effect of a finite value for w~ can be accounted for
exactly and simply in terms of the solution when wz —=0,
thus we will neglect w~ in our discussion. Also, note
W~ ( WD.
The work of Brownstein and Tarr' (BT) on single pores
corresponds to the weak coupling limit w, —+0. These au-
thors describe the behavior of the magnetization in the
slow diffusion limit wp »10wD, the crossover from slow
diffusion to fast diffusion at w = wD, and the behavior ofp D&
the magnetization in the fast diffusion limit w
See Fig. 2. In the fast diffusion limit, the surface relaxa-
tion rate is slow compared to the rate of diffusive magne-
tization equilibration; the magnetization is approximately
uniform across a pore and the decay is single exponential.
Coupling between pores can be important in the fast
difFusion regime.
In Fig. 2 we show that BT have discussed the behavior
of the magnetization in going from point 1 to 2 in rate
space. In this paper we develop methods of studying the
behavior of the magnetization in going from point 2 to
point 3 in this space. The BT methodology is valid here,
in principle, but cumbersome in describing this evolution,
in practice. It seems to be the case that sedimentary
rocks correspond to a point somewhere along the 2~3
line of Fig. 2. Individual pores would be in the fast
diffusion limit were they uncoupled from their neighbors
and the spectrum of decay rates is conventionally inter-
preted as a spectrum of pore sizes. If the coupling w, is
"strong enough, " however, then the entire pore space be-
comes a single pore in the fast diffusion limit and the de-
cay spectrum narrows to a 5 function at the rate
wz =pA /V, where 2 and V are the total area and pore
volume of the system. Decay in this limit is strictly single— w t
exponential, M(t) =M(0)e, where M is the total di-
pole moment of the system. A goal of this paper is to un-
derstand this evolution and what constitutes "strong
enough" coupling. Since w, is proportional to the
diffusion constant, it can be increased by a factor of -20
simply by superheating the sample past the boiling point
of water. Thus, we feel that temperature dependent de-
cay spectra should prove to be a powerful probe of the
physics of magnetization evolution.
Section II contains a description of various measures of
magnetic behavior that concern us. The model porous
medium we study is described. The equations of motion
of the magnetization in this porous medium are dis-
cussed. In Sec. III, we develop perturbation theory solu-
tions to the equations of motion in both the weak and
strong coupling limits (points 2 and 3 in Fig. 2). Section
IV contains a description and results of an effective medi-
um theory treatment of the equations of motion. We dis-
cuss numerically exact solutions to the equation of
motion for several small system realizations of the model
porous medium in Sec. V. Finally, in Sec. VI we compare
the three methods we have employed to study the behav-
ior of magnetization and discuss the relevance of our re-
sults to physical systems.
II. MAGNETIZATION EQUATIONS AND
POROUS MEDIA MODEL
In a typical magnetization measurement, the time evo-
lution of the total dipole moment is probed, i.e., M(t)
versus t. The total dipole moment may decay as a single
exponential, a multiple exponential, a stretched exponen-
tial, etc. To examine the content of a decay curve in a
model independent way, we define the mean lifetime:
f t (dM/dt)dt f M (t)dt
f "(dM/dr)dr
0
Wcjj=.
Wp
fast — strong
where M(t) is the total dipole moment of the system at
time t. Note that ~ is directly related to the Fourier-
Laplace transform of M, M(s, k),
lim limM(s, k) .M 0 s-01-0 (2)
fast - weak
II
BTeeaeeQ'@
WD
Wp
FIG. 2. Rate space for magnetization decay in pore systems.
Brownstein and Tarr discuss evolution from slow to fast
diffusion, 1~2. We discuss evolution from weak to strong cou-
pling, 2~3.
This quantity is discussed by Torquato in the context of
permeability and by Wilkinson, Johnson, and Schwartz
in the context of magnetization decay in isolated pores.
Given that the magnetization evolution involves both
diffusion and decay, it is reasonable to expect to represent
(M) in the form
di, n (t)e
0
where n (A, ) is the spectrum of decay rates. In fact n(A, )
can be expressed uniquely as n (A, )=+„I„5(k— A,„),
where A,
„
is the eigenvalue and I„its amplitude, as dis-
cussed by BT. Then,

--- PAGE 3 ---
K. R. McCALL, D. L. JOHNSON, AND R. A. GUYER
M(t)
M(0) ro
(5)
—— I "dA,— n (k)—:& A, (4)
0
i.e., ~ is the appropriately weighted average of X
Thus, -, , the n = — 1 moment of n (A, ), favors small A, or
slow decay rates.
At early time, t~O, the decay of the total dipole mo-
ment is given by
where r, = A, V/A V, , s,"=S;./S, U, = V, /V, w, =DS/iV,
wz =p A /V (n«e, wz —= 1/ro) and the sum is over all sites
j which are nearest neighbors (NN) to i Overbars indi-
cate averages.
We seek solutions to Eq. (8) subject to the initial condi-
tion at t =0 of uniform magnetization, M, (0)=mV, ,
where m is the magnetization. Since s;~ =s~„but U;AUJ
(usually) the operator %," is not symmetric in the inter-
change of i and j. Equation (8) is symmetrized by using
M; =QU;8;; then
= J dAAn(A, )—:&A, & .
'To 0
The short-time behavior provides a measure of the n = 1
moment of n(k). Given that surface eff'ects are the dom-
inant mechanism for relaxation, magnetization decay at
the very shortest times is proportional to the total matrix
surface to total Quid volume in the system; i.e.,
1/ro=p A /V= w .
In the strong coupling limit, e.g., D —+~, the entire
system can be viewed as a single pore with total dipole
moment decay given by its surface to volume ratio; i.e.,
1/r =pA/V. Thus,
1limD~oo &
NN s.g S.Jw p+w g — 5J w
Jk i VV.
(10)
M(0)
=
& 8(0)I8(t) &,
and s; =0 for j not a nearest neighbor of i. Given our in-
itial condition we find that the total dipole moment
M (t)= g, M; can be expressed as
We will focus our attention on the quantities ~, ~o, and
n (A, ). Through calculations of M(t) in terms of n (A, ) we
hope to learn n(A, ) (and therefore r and ro) and its rela-
tionship to the geometry of the pore space.
While the Quid-saturated rocks in which we are pri-
marily interested do not contain a regular lattice of pores,
they do contain a multiply connected system of pores far
from the percolation threshold. In addition, the magneti-
zation evolution is governed by diffusive processes which
are independent of the precise connectivity of the lattice.
Thus, to have a speci6c model of a pore system, we
choose a hypercubic lattice of pores and throats. We
identify pores with sites in a lattice and throats with
bonds between sites. Each site is characterized by a
volume V; and a surface area A, . Each bond is charac-
terized by a cross-sectional area S,- and a length l; .
Thus, in a hypercubic lattice model in d dimension, we
admit X possible values of V and 3, and dX possible
values of l and S, where X is the number of sites. For ex-
ample, in a particularly simple model we might take
2;=4mB;, V;=4mB; /3, l;-=l, and S;-=S, where R,- is a
pore radius.
Following Cohen and Mendelson, we assume that
each pore is in the fast diffusion limit (or would be if it
were uncoupled from the rest of the system) and that all
of the lengths i,. are the same. We are led to Eq. (6.15a)
of Cohen and Mendelson for the dipole moment in pore
;.MJ,
J
(14)
Iin the present case the matrix, Eq. (10), is real sym-
metric, the IP„& are a complete set of orthornormal
states and the A,„arepositive definite] we find
I 8(t) &
= g & P„I8(0) & (15)
(16)
Upon comparison with Eq. (3) we have
n (A )= y I & 8(0)Iy„&I'5(A, — X„). (17)
The rates A,„arethe eigenvalues of &. The amplitude at
each rate A,
„
is the overlap of If„&, from Eq. (14), with
&8(0)I, the state created in experiment by making the
magnetization uniform at t =O. In the next three sec-
tions of this paper we will describe three methods for de-
veloping solutions to Eqs. (16) and (17).
and & 8(0) I 8(0) &
= 1. Expanding I 8 & in terms of the com-
plete set of eigenstates of &,
(13)

--- PAGE 4 ---
MAGNETIZATION EVOLUTION IN CONNECTED PORE SYSTEMS
III. PERTURBATION THEORY FOR
STRONG AND %'EAK COUPLINGS
and look for solutions to
(u")+~v) Iy„&=x„l1(„& (22)
We wish to find perturbation theory solutions to Eq.
(9), given the Hamiltonian in Eq. (10). The ratio w, /w
determines whether the system is in the weak coupling
limit (near point 2 in Fig. 2) or the strong coupling limit
(near point 3 in Fig. 2). Therefore, we rewrite Eq. (9) as
= — (m(0)+~V)I8&, (18)d7.
7(,„=E„+~&nIVIn &+a' &k vn&'
k(e )
and to first order
(23)
in terms of E„and I n &. To second order in the perturba-
tion,
where e is the small parameter and the quantities r, &( ',
and V are chosen according to the region of interest.
Strong coupling:
wp
T— Wctw
I@„&=c„In &+~ y Ik &
k (An) n k
Here c„is given by
(24)
(25)
NN S.k
k i
V,, =r, 5,,
8'eak coupling:
S;
~
Ug UJ
(19)
k (An) (En Ek )
correct to second order in the perturbation. From Eq.
(16) the normalized total dipole moment is given by
W
E'=
wp
r=w, t, m',,0)=r, fi,,
&"'In &=E„In&, (21)
I
lJNN S'k S''
1J ~ lJ
k i ~ U;UJ
Using standard Schrodinger perturbation theory we
may investigate either the strong or the weak coupling
limit. We assume we know the eigenvalues E„andeigen-
kets I n & which satisfy
The problem at hand is to solve Eq. (21) for In & and E„
and to use the results to find M(t).
We consider the strong coupling case first. By inspec-
tion we see that the ground state of &' ', with energy
E0=0, is equivalent to the t =0 solution for
I
8 & de-
scribed in Sec. II, i.e., IO &
=
I 8(0) &, where I 8(0) & is given
in Eq. (12). Since l8(0) & is orthogonal to all nonzero In &
and & OI VI 0 &
= 1 we can write the normalized total dipole
moment in the strong coupling limit, using Eqs.
(23)— (26), in the form
I&klvlO&l'. . . I&klvlO&l'
k (%0) Ek k (%0)
wp
+e g exp — Ekw, +w &klvIk&+ew g tI&mIvIk &I' (27)
k (%0) Ek m (Xk) k m
correct to second order in the perturbation. As expected, for infinitely strong coupling between pores (e=O) the mag-
netization is single exponential with decay rate w reQecting the total surface to volume ratio in the system. The first
correction to the decay rate (second order in the perturbation, first order in e) decreases it below w . Note that the first
correction to the amplitude is second order in the small parameter E' wp/w, . The multiple exponential spectrum due
to second-order corrections consists of small amplitude contributions at very high rates. As w, —+~, the dominant
term in the decay rate is Ekw, ; thus we expect the decay rates to increase in proportion to w, . These fast rates corre-
spond to the transfer of magnetization between pores due to high coupling. From Eq. (17)
I & k IVIO& I'
2
k (%0) Ek k (WO)
I & m IVIk & I'+ 6' (28)
a 5 function of almost unit amplitude and small ampli-
tude contributions at rates increasing in proportion to w, .
Note, to zeroth order in the perturbation, z =&0=1jw
as expected Isee Eq. (7)]. This perturbation expansion of
l
the spectrum of rates is valid when a magnetic moment
has had time to explore enough of the pore space to be
inAuenced by the average geometry of the system, as op-
posed to isolated sections, before decaying due to relaxa-

--- PAGE 5 ---
7348 K. R. McCALL, D. L. JOHNSON, AND R. A. GUYER
NN s
(kV~n ) = y™5„„—
m n VkVn
(29)
The total dipole moment to first order can be written ex-
plicitly in the weak coupling limit:
M(t) un 2e kn
M (0) „N u„kr„—rk
tion at the walls. In the next section, in connection with
effective medium theory, we present a simple self-
consistent perturbation theory (SCPT) which has some
computational advantages.
We now turn to the weak coupling case. Here, the un-
perturbed Hamiltonian &' ' is diagonal, so we find
E„=r„and~n ) is a vector with 1 in the nth place and 0
elsewhere. The matrix elements (k~V~n ) can be evalu-
ated analytically; we find
M(s) I ~ n(A)d~,
M(0) "o s+A, (32)
Since M(s) is analytic everywhere except on the negative
real axis, the contour integral which takes one from M(s)
to M(t) can be wrapped around the negative real axis
with the result that Eq. (3) is reproduced. Furthermore,
n (A, ) can be obtained from Eq. (32) by
To illustrate the application of EMT we examine the
physical system in an extreme approximation. We take
all of the cross-sectional areas equal and all of the
volumes equal, i.e., s, .=1 or 0 and v; =1. We retain dis-
order only in the pore decay rates, e.g., due to variation
of p from pore to pore (r; =p;/P).
It is particularly convenient to work in the Laplace
transform domain. Before we describe EMT, we review
some exact relationships. From Eqs. (16) and (17) we
have
NN sk
Xexp — r„w +w, g t
Vn
(30)
n(A, )=— lim Im1 M(s)
7T s~ A, lE
(33)
NN sk
X5 k — r„w +w, g
k Vn
(31)
When the pores are decoupled (e =0, w, =— 0) the total di-
pole moment contains a spectrum of decay rates corre-
sponding to the spectrum of surface to volume ratios of
the individual pores. The amplitudes of the exponential
contributions are proportional to the volumes of the
pores. The first-order correction for weak coupling
changes the amplitudes up or down depending on the rel-
ative size of nearest-neighbor decay rates, and increases
the decay rates by a factor proportional to the coupling
rate u, . The spectrum of rates is
Vn 2~ NN
(nA, )= g 1—
N V
If all the r; are equal to a common value r, then
n(k)=6(A, — w r) and M(s)/M(0)=[s+w r] '. When
the values of r; are not all equal, we define the complex
valued function r(s) such that
M(s) 1
s+w r(s)
(34)
The goal of EMT is to determine the optimal r(s), analo-
gous to the self-energy in quantum mechanics (see below).
Following the EMT prescription we replace all decay
rates r, by an effective rate r. We seek to find r such that
changing the decay rate at one site, i =0, back to its orig-
inal value does not change the total dipole moment, on
average. Taking the Laplace transform of Eq. (8), using
r; =r +hr 5;0, where hr =r — r, we find
In this case, the zeroth order lifetimes ~ and ~0 are not
equivalent: r =g„u„/Nwzr„andru=N/(wz g„u„rn).
The former weights long times, the latter weights short
times.
The perturbation theory expressions found for the total
dipole moment and spectrum of rates in the strong and
weak coupling limits are useful benchmarks for more ela-
borate calculations which allow us to explore the full
range of coupling strength.
IV. EFFECTIVE MEDIUM THEORY
Eff'ective medium theory (EMT) has been described
previously for calculations of electrical conduction in
resistor networks, as well as for electronic structure cal-
culations where it is known as the coherent potential ap-
proximation (CPA). ' Random values of conductance are
replaced by an average value, chosen such that when one
resistor is changed back to its original value, the eftect on
the conductance is on average zero. EMT works best for
very simply problems. Equation (8), the equation of
motion for the dipole moment at site i, contains bond dis-
order, S;., as well as two kinds of site disorder, A, and V;.
(s+w r)M, =mV — w b, rM. 05;o+w, g(M — M, ), (35)
J
where I is the initial magnetization. We solve for the di-
pole moment on the zeroth site using a Fourier series
transform and find
IV
0 s+w r
w I(s, r)b, r1—
1+w I(s, r)b, r
(36)
where
I(s,r)
1
f
7I
f
7T
d 0 ' 0
s + w r +4w, g," &sin.2
(37)
and d is the dimension of the hypercubic lattice. [We
often use I(s) as shorthand for I(s, r) when there is no
ambiguity. ]
We impose the condition that at site zero the dipole
moment averaged over the distribution of rates p(r) is

--- PAGE 6 ---
MAGNETIZATION EVOLUTION IN CONNECTED PORE SYSTEMS 7349
the same as the total dipole moment of the model system,
i.e., a system made up entirely of rates r. This condition
is imposed at 6nite s. Thus r is a function of s. We re-
quire
w =100
dr p(r) =0,r r(—s)
1+w I(s)[r — r(s)]
(38)
where p (r) is the distribution of rates r. Equation (38) is
a single-site approximation. Given a distribution of rates
we can find an r for each s. Calculations of n (A, ), M(t),
, and ~0 are straightforward, once we have r(s)
We note that if we write out the Hamiltonian in Eq.
(10) with u; and s, independent of i and j (the extreme ap-
proximation under discussion) we see that &;J corre-
sponds to a tight-binding Hamiltonian with site disorder
r, . Therefore, there is an ismorphism between the two
problems:
03
Ol
5~Z,
WpP'; F;
Wc~t
I~F0,
w I'~X
n(A)~A (k, =O, E) .
(39)
0 1
P (time )
O.OI
The quantities on the right are those defined in Ref. 11.
Equation (38) is the CPA equation. Note in particular
that the spectral density relevant to this problem, n(A, ), is
not the total density of states, but rather it is the k=0
component only, rejecting the condition that the system
was initially magnetized uniformly.
A calculation of (An, ) in EMT, requires a solution to
the integral I(s, r ). Equation (37) can be solved in closed
form in the case of a one-dimensional lattice,
FIG. 3. One-dimensional spectra of decay rates from EMT.
The distribution of individual pore decay rates is given by Eq.
(42) (dotted lines). The coupling rate varies; m =~o '=1. The
mean decay rate ~ ' is marked by short vertical lines. As
+c~ ~) &m ~&O
1
I, (s, r )=-
4w, &z &z+ I (40)
where z =(s+w r)/4w, In hig. her dimension, the in-
tegral must be evaluated numerically. For the three-
dimensional case, one integration can be done by hand
and we did the remaining two-dimensional integral:
a/2 m/2 1
I, ( rs) = dx dy
z+sin x+sin y z+sin x+sin y+1
(41)
p(r)=sin (~r), 0 r~~2 . (42)
In Figs. 3 and 4 we show n(A, ) calculated in EMT (the
solid line) for the one-dimensional and three-dimensional
cases, respectively. The spectra of decay rates were cal-
culated for various values of w„0.01~w, /w ~100 in
Fig. 3 and 0.01 ~ w, /w ~0.2 in Fig. 4. To find n (A, ) we
by brute force. Equation (37) can also be rewritten as a
single integral in time over a modified Bessel function of
complex argument raised to the dimensional power. "
We did not pursue this method here.
Our first choice of decay rate distribution is the bimo-
dal distribution given by
use the following procedure.
(1) Choose w =1, @=0.001 and p (r) given in Eq. (42).
We choose e small enough that smaller choices produce
no visible change in n (A.).
(2) For each s = — A.— i E, numerically minimize the ab-
solute value of the left-hand side of Eq. (38) with respect
to r.
(3) Use the resultant F( — A, — is) and Eqs. (33) and (34)
to find n (A, ).
The results shown in Figs. 3 and 4 con6rm those ex-
pected from perturbation theory. In the weak coupling
limit n (A, ) is the same as the original distribution of rates.
In the strong coupling limit n (A, ) approaches a 5 function

--- PAGE 7 ---
7350 K. R. McCALL, D. L. JOHNSON, AND R. A. GUYER
with a tail on the high rate side. Note that the rates in
n(A, ) extend beyond the A, =2 limit of p(r) as w, in-
creases. The mean lifetime ~, whose inverse is marked
with a vertical line on the figures, approaches 7.o= 1 in the
limit of infinite coupling. The most striking di6'erence be-
tween the one- and three-dimensional cases is that the
spectrum of decay rates narrows for much lower values of
the coupling ratio in three dimensions than in one dimen-
sion. The degree of connectedness of the system, provid-
ing more ways for magnetic moments to move from one
pore to another, has a strong effect on the resulting spec-
trum of decay rates.
Because of the connection with the quantum mechani-
cal problem we can bring to bear on the problem set by
Eqs. (9)— (17), any of a variety of approximate methods
designed for electron and phonon problems. As an illus-
tration we sketch in Appendix A the treatment of Eqs.
(9)— (17) using the self-consistent perturbation theory
(SCPT) formalism of Ehrenreich and Schwartz. ' The
outcome of this treatment is a self-consistent equation
that provides r,
where I(s,F(s)) is given by Eq. (37), for use in Eqs. (33)
and (34). Equation (43) can also be found from approxi-
mate treatment of the EMT condition, Eq. (38). In Fig. 4
we show n(A, ) versus A, with r(s) from Eq. (43) (the
dashed line) for the three-dimensional case. The distribu-
tion of decay rates is given by Eq. (42). Since Eq. (43) is
dependent on the first and second moments of the rate
distribution and an integral determined by the crystal
structure only, SCPT captures the width of the spectrum
of rates, but not the details of the exact n (A, ). The ap-
proximate treatment of EMT, Eq. (43), is in good agree-
ment with its exact implementation for & (Ar ) & /w, (( I
( w, )0.2 in our example).
EMT is a valuable method for studying the spectrum
of decay rates in a simple system. In this case, the system
contains variation in pore values of p only. We are also
interested in situations in which there are variations in
pore radius and interpore throat size. Having more than
one varying quantity in an EMT calculation leads to am-
biguities in the choice of conditions and their meaning.
Instead of expanding the discussion of EMT calculations
we turn to matrix diagonalization.
w =Q.P—
002
P (time )
0
FIG. 4. Three-dimensional spectra of decay rates from EMT
and SCPT. The EMT results are the solid lines; the SCPT re-
sults are the dashed lines. The distribution of individual pore
decay rates is given by Eq. {42) (dotted lines). The coupling rate
varies; w p 7 o = 1. The mean decay rate ~ ' from EMT is
marked by short vertical lines.
In principle, the total dipole moment and spectrum of
rates n (A, ) can be found exactly for any given porous sys-
tem by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian in Eq. (10). In
practice, computation time and memory constraints re-
quire the model porous medium systems we study by this
method to be orders of magnitude smaller than any ex-
perimentally studied piece of material. However, for
these small systems we may examine the consequences of
variations in volume, surface area, and cross-sectional
al ea.
We use the following procedure to find n (A, ).
(1) Diagonalize the Hamiltonian &;. to find the eigen-
values and eigenvectors of the matrix.
(2) Find the overlap of each eigenvector ~g„& with
~8(0) & given in Eq. (12). The square of this overlap is the
amplitude of the spectrum of rates at the rate equal to the
corresponding eigenvalue A,„[seeEq. (17)j.
In order to compensate for our finite-size systems we
use periodic boundary conditions in the Hamiltonian and
average n (A, ) over many realizations, typically 500 or
1000 for systems of 8 X 8 X 8=512 pores. The results of
matrix diagonalization (MD) in several cases are de-
scribed in the following.
(1) The spectra of decay rates n (k) shown in Fig. 5 are
for a one-dimensional lattice of pores. The pore volumes
and throat cross-sectional areas are constant; the indivi-
dual pore decay rates vary with the rate distribution
given by Eq. (42). The lattice size is 512 pores and the re-
sults are averaged over 500 realizations. The coupling ra-
tio m, /m varies from 0.01 to 100; m =1. The dashed
curves are the EMT results shown in Fig. 3; we find the
spectra of decay rates very well approximated by EMT.
When m, =10, the spectrum of decay rates is that of
the individual pore decay rates. As m, increases, the
spectrum of decay rates collapses such that the majority
of the amplitude is in a sharp peak at X=1. Although

--- PAGE 8 ---
MAGNETIZATION EVOLUTION IN CONNECTED PORE SYSTEMS 7351
high rate amplitudes are decreasing, the maximum rate is
increasing proportional to w, for large w, /w as predict-
ed from perturbation theory.
(2) In Fig. 6 we show n (A, ) for a three-dimensional lat-
tice of pores. The pore volumes and throat cross-
sectional areas are constant; the individual pore decay
rates vary with the rate distribution given by Eq. (42).
The lattice size is 8 X 8 X 8=512 pores and the results are
averaged over 500 realizations. The coupling ratio range
is 0.01~w, /w ~0.2; w =1. Each pore has six nearest
neighbors rather than two as in the one-dimensional case.
This increased connectivity causes the spectrum of rates
to collapse to a 5 function much more rapidly with in-
creasing w, than for the one-dimensional case. The
width of the spectrum of decay rates is already very nar-
row when w, =0.2, although ~ '(w . Although the
EMT results of Fig. 4 are plotted in Fig. 6, they are al-
most not visible. The EMT approximation is known to
improve as dimension is increased.
The previous examples have focused on cases where
the decay rates vary between pores, but are independent
of volume. In a physical system in the fast diffusion re-
gime, mD /w & 1, we expect an individual pore decay rate
to be determined by the surface to volume ratio of the
pore. In addition, the spectrum of decay rates measured
experimentally in uncoupled pores is the volume weight-
ed distribution of individual pore decay rates. That is,
larger pores will contribute more signal to a measurement
since they contain more magnetic moments. Making the
assumption that all pores are spherical we can assign
volumes and decay rates to individual pores given a dis-
tribution of radii a, ,
Vg = (44)
A 2~a min
p (a)= sina' a (45)
where a;„and A are chosen such that ( a ) = 1 and the
spectrum of rates n (A, ) is given by Eq. (42) when the
pores are uncoupled. The lattice size is 8X8X8=512
pores and the results are averaged over 1000 realizations.
where (a") is the average of a;". Allowing U; to vary in-
troduces substantial variation in the coupling terms of
the Hamiltonian &, even if there is no variation in cross-
sectional area s; .
(3) In Fig. 7 we show n (A, ) for a three-dimensional lat-
tice of pores. The throat cross-sectional areas are con-
stant; the pore radii are chosen from the distribution
wc=100 w =O.P, —
~ ~ ~
2
l
I
' ~ e, I 'I
I,
01 0.02
O.OT .OI
0 1 2
P (time )
0 1 2
X (time )
FIG. 5. One-dimensional spectra of decay rates from MD.
The distribution of pore decay rates is given by Eq. (42) (dotted
line). The coupling rate varies; wp 7o =1. The mean decay
rate ~ is marked by vertical lines. The EMT results of Fig. 3
are the dashed lines.
FIG. 6. Three-dimensional spectra of decay rates from MD.
The distribution of pore decay rates is given by Eq. (42) (dotted
line). The couPling rate varies; wp=zo '=1. The mean decay
rate v. ' is marked by vertical lines. The dashed lines are the
EMT results of Fig. 4.

--- PAGE 9 ---
7352 K. R. McCALL, D. L. JOHNSON, AND R. A. GUYER
The coupling ratio range is 10 ~m, /m ~10; w =1.
Note that the distribution of pore radii is heavily weight-
ed toward small pores. In order that the volume weight-
ed distribution of rates at zero coupling have equal size
peaks above and below A, = 1, 95% of the pores have de-
cay rates in the range 1 & A, (2. Thus we can think of the
large pores (small decay rates) as dilute disorder in a sys-
tem of very small pores. Initially, as m, is increased, the
small pores couple to each other forming a narrow peak
in the decay spectrum at A, =1.5, while the large pores
remain relatively unefFected. This is due to the compara-
tively large number of small pores and also to the inverse
volume e6'ect in the coupling terms of the Hamiltonian
Isee Eq. (10)]. The effective coupling of large pores to
their neighbors is much smaller than that of small pores.
This feature is retained even to w, = 10; n (A, ) still has
finite amplitude at small A, in contrast to the results of
Fig. 6.
(4) In Fig. 8 we show n (A, ) for a three-dimensional lat-
tice of pores. The throat cross-sectional areas are con-
stant; the pore radii are chosen from a log-normal distri-
bution
1 (1na — uo )
p(a)= expoaV.'2,~ (46)
where uo= — —' and o. = —,', values which make the aver-
age pore radius one. Experimental measurements on
rocks show the pore size distribution may vary over an
order of magnitude or more. The distribution of Eq. (46)
is an attempt to mimic a very broad spectrum such as
might be seen in rocks. The lattice size 8XSX8=512
pores and the results are averaged over 1000 realizations.
The coupling ratio range is 0~w, /w ~100; w =1. The
raggedness of the results decreases slowly with increased
number of realizations and increased bin size; each
smooth curve is constructed using 50 bins spaced evenly
on a logarithmic scale from 10 ' to 10'. The small A,
part of the spectrum has substantial amplitude even for
large coupling rates, due to the inverse volume e6'ect in
the coupling term of the Hamiltonian. Decay due to cou-
pling is enhanced for small pores and decreased for large
pores when volume e6'ects are included in the coupling
term of the Hamiltonian.
vr =100— w =10
~.. I
I
I
Q
I I I I I I I
I I I I I I III
01-
l I t I I I
0
2
P (time )
0.1
A. (time )
FICx. 7. Spectra of decay rates from MD when rates and
volumes are correlated. The distribution of pore radii is given
by Eq. (45). The coupling rate varies; m~=~p '=1. The mean
decay rate ~ ' is marked by vertical lines. The dotted lines are
the uncoupled pore result, Eq. (42).
FIG. 8. Spectra of decay rates from MD for a broad distribu-
tion of pore radii. The distribution of pore radii is given by Eq.
(46). The coupling 1ate var ies LU& 7 p = 1. The mean decay
rate ~ ' is marked by vertical lines. The dashed lines are n (A, )
for the uncoupled system.

--- PAGE 10 ---
MAGNETIZATION EVOLUTION IN CONNECTED PORE SYSTEMS 7353
8
Al II[ I I I I I I II[ I I I I I I Ii) 10
103
106
..~
'' Q' ..~.'
jp''' .&' .0105
32::4""
104
I IIII I I I I I IIII I I I I I IIII I I I I I IIII
10 ' 10' 10' 10'
101
10'
FIG. 9. Maximum decay rate as a function of coupling rate.
The maximum decay rates are shown for the MD results of
Figs. 5 (o ) and 6 (4) for which the distribution of pore decay
rates is given by Eq. (42), and Figs. 7 ( ) and 8 (V) for which
the distributions of pore radii are given by Eqs. (45) and (46), re-
spectively. A, ,„ccm, as predicted by perturbation theory in the
strong coupling limit.
One of the predictions of perturbation theory in the
strong coupling limit [see Eq. (28)] is that the small am-
plitude contributions to n (A, ) are at rates which increase
in proportion to the coupling rate; A, ~ w, . We show this
to be the case in Fig. 9, where the maximum decay rate
k,
„
is plotted against the coupling rate w, for all four of
the MD examples. Increased coupling causes very high
frequency modes of very low amplitude as the magnetiza-
tion Aux from one pore to its neighbors increases. For
the special cases in which only the pore rates vary, it is
simple to show from Eq. (19) that lim A, ,„=4dw„
C
where d is the dimension. This is borne out in Fig. 9.
MD is a powerful method for studying the magnetiza-
tion equation for connected pore systems. Any quantity
appearing in the equation may be varied. We chose to
study systems where only the individual pore rate varied,
confirming our EMT results, and where both rate and
volume vary. There are many more options to consider:
the throat cross-sectional areas between pores are not all
the same in a physical system, and the surface area and
volume of a pore are not necessarily strictly related. MD
is the most accurate method we discuss for studying the
effects of a variety of geometrical features on the tota1 di-
pole moment spectrum of decay rates.
O.f5
10
I f i IIII I I I I I IIII I I I I I III
10 10 10
w, , (time )
10
particular system's decay-rate spectrum as the coupling
between pores is increased. The results of all three
methods are in good agreement. The important qualita-
tive features appearing in all three methods of solution
are (1) when the coupling between pores is zero or very
weak, the spectrum of decay rates is that of the individual
pores. (2) As the coupling is increased, the range of de-
cay rates increases, shifting to high rates. (3) For very
strong coupling, the spectrum of decay rates narrows to a
peak at a rate determined by the ratio of the total surface
to total volume in the pore system.
The mean lifetime ~ is a single parameter which
characterizes a spectrum of decay rates in a model in-
dependent way. In Fig. 10 we summarize our results for
as a function of the coupling rate w, for the various
situations we have encountered. In all cases, ~0 is unity.
The EMT and MD results for similar distribution and di-
mension are in good agreement. The upper pair of curves
are from the three-dimensional MD calculations using
log-normal [Eq. (46)] and bimodal [Eq. (45)] distribution
of pore sizes. The central pair of curves is from the one-
dimensional MD and EMT calculations using the bimo-
dal distribution of pore decay rates given by Eq. (42).
The lower triplet is from the three-dimensional MD,
EMT, and SCPT calculations using the birnodal distribu-
tion of pore decay rates given by Eq. (42). The most not-
able feature of this figure is that the crossover from un-
coupled to strongly coupled behavior occurs over approx-
imately two decades in the coupling strength.
In order to relate our theoretical study to physical sys-
tems we must make some estimate of the coupling be-
tween pores. Two examples of porous media with widely
differ, ent properties are sandstone and sol-gel glass. Both
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We have developed equations governing the magneti-
zation evolution in Quid-filled connected pore systems.
The evolution of the total dipole moment can be de-
scribed by a spectrum of decay rates which rejects the
decay rates of individual pores as well as the strength of
the coupling between pores. We have used three
methods, perturbation theory, effective-medium theory,
and matrix diagonalization, to study the evolution of a
FIG. 10. Mean lifetime versus coupling strength. In the
strong coupling limit, ~ —+~0=1.0. The lines are a guide for
the eye. The mean lifetime is plotted for all the cases previously
discussed. For distribution of pore decay rates given by Eq.
(42): the one-dimensional cases in Figs. 3 (+) and 5 (0), and
the three-dimensional cases in Fig. 4 ( X, EMT; Q, SCPT), and 6
( ). For the three-dimensional cases using the distribution of
pore radii given in Eq. (45) and shown in Fig. 7 (& ), and using
the distribution of pore radii given in Eq. (46) and shown in Fig.
8 (V).

--- PAGE 11 ---
K. R. McCALL, D. L. JOHNSON, AND R. A. GUYER
systems have been studied extensively using nuclear mag-
netic resonance to measure the decay of the total dipole
moment in water-saturated samples. Using data for vari-
ous sandstones from Kenyon et al. , we estimate a typi-
cal porosity of 20%, pore diameter of 80 pm, and throat
diameter of 30 pm. A typical mean T, is 250 ms; we take
this to be approximately v.o. The data were taken at room
temperature, where the di6'usion coe%cient of water is
D =2.5X10 cm /s. These numbers imply a coupling
strength w, /w (0.1. Kenyon et al. have decomposed
their total dipole moment measurements into spectra of
decay times which are one or more orders of magnitude
wide. The decomposition is dependent on the assumption
that the pores are uncoupled, i.e., w, =0. Given our
small estimated coupling strength and the very broad dis-
tribution of pore sizes typically found in sandstones, the
assumption that a spectrum of decay rates reAects the
density of pore sizes in the rocks is probably a good one.
Data on sandstones correspond to the w, ~0. 1 spectra in
Fig. 8.
The sol-gel glasses characterized by Bhattacharja,
et al. ' have very diferent characteristics from the sand-
stones just discussed. The typical porosity in these sys-
tems is 85%, a representative pore diameter (assuming
spherical pores) is 0.50 pm, and an average throat diame-
ter is 0.24 pm. The magnetization decay measured for
these water-saturated silica glasses was single exponential
with a decay time T& =100 ms at room temperature.
These numbers imply a coupling strength w, /w =10,
which is certainly in agreement with the single exponen-
tial result. In such highly coupled pore systems, we
would expect the spectrum of decay rates to be a 6 func-
tion, particularly in sol-gel glasses where the distribution
of pore sizes is ~arrow.
An obvious question is whether there exist physical
systems in which a range of coupling strength between
pores can be explored. A possible method of attack is to
change the diA'usion coefficient of the saturating Quid by
raising or lowering the temperature. In this way the cou-
pling strength between pores may be changed by an order
of magnitude or more. On the other hand, if the porous
sample used in such an experiment has a very broad spec-
trum of pore sizes, the extra range in coupling may not
make an experimentally evident change in the spectrum
of decay rates. In the future we hope to compare our re-
sults with relevant experiments exploring coupling be-
tween pores.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank B. Halperin, R. Kleinberg, L.
Schwartz, P. Sen, A. Sezginer, and D. Wilkinson for help-
ful discussions.
APPENDIX SELF-CGNSISTKNT
PKRTURBATIQN THKGRY IN THK
STRO)NG COUPLING LIMIT
Here we employ a perturbation theory in the strong
coupling limit appropriate to the problem in which there
is a decay rate distribution whose width is small com-
pared to the coupling parameter w, . Vr'e write the Ham-
iltonian as the sum of an unperturbed term describing a
perfect tight-binding crystal and a perturbation term due
to small fluctuations in rates:
(Al)
(A2)
V, =br, 5) . (A3)
Here x is the number of nearest neighbors, j„„is a nearest
neighbor to i, r' ' is an arbitrary dimensionless rate
describing the perfect crystal, and Ar, =r; — r '. The
average Green function defines a self-energy, X, through
the expression
«)= 1 1
z —w"' — v z —w'" —r
Expanding X to second order in V we find
r= ( v)+ & vG"') — ( v) G"'&v),
(A4)
(A5)
where 6' ' is the Green function for a perfect tight-
binding crystal. In the magnetization problem, the self-
energy describes the change in an e6'ective rate of decay
from the reference point r' '. Thus, inserting the perfect
crystal Green function, we find the r of Eq. (34) can be
written
r = (r ) — w ((r — (r ) )')I(s,r"'),
where I(s, r' ') is given by Eq. (37). The method of SCPT
suggests we replace r' ' in the integral I(s, r' ') with r.
We then have a self-consistent equation for r which is in-
dependent of the reference value r' ' in the original prob-
lem [Eq. (43)]. In this formalism the value of r is given by
the average and the second moment of the distribution of
rates and an integral which depends only on the crystal
structure. It is straightforward, but slightly tedious, to
show that Eqs. (43) and (28) are equivalent to first order
in e.
K. R. Brownstein and C. E. Tarr, Phys. Rev. A 19, 2446 (1979).
2%". E. Kenyon, P. I. Day, C. Straley, and J. F. Willemsen, So-
ciety of Petroleum Engineering, Report No. 15643 (1986).
3W. E. Kenyon, J. J. Howard, A. Sezginer, C. Straley, A. Mat-
teson, K. Horkowitz, and R. Ehrlich, Transactions of the So-
ciety of Professional Well Log Analysts, paper LL (1989).
4M. H. Cohen and K. S. Mendelson, J. Appl. Phys. 53, 1127
(1982).
5S. Torquato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2644 (1990).
60. Wilkinson, D. L. Johnson, and L. M. Schwartz, Phys. Rev.

--- PAGE 12 ---
MAGNETIZATION EVOLUTION IN CONNECTED PORE SYSTEMS 7355
B 44, 4960 (1991).
7W. P. Halperin, F. D'Orazio, S. Bhattacharja, and J. C.
Tarczon, in Molecular Dynamics in Restricted Geometries,
edited by J. Klafter and J. M. Drake (Wiley, New York,
1989), Chap. 11.
8For examp1e, J. J. Sakurai, Modern Quantum Mechanics
(Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA, 1985), Chap. 5.
W. Kirkpatrick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 27, 1722 (1971).
OH. Ehrenreich and L. M. Schwartz, in Solid State Physics,
edited by H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz, and D. Turnbull (Academ-
ic, New York, 1976), Vol. 31.
T. Wolfram and J. Callaway, Phys. Rev. 130, 2207 (1963).
2S. Bhattacharja, F. D'Orazio, J. C. Tarczon, W. P. Halperin,
and R. Gerhardt, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 72, 2126 (1989).

--- PAGE 13 ---

--- PAGE 14 ---