--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 847
Nguyen and Mardon (1995) initially proposed using a FEM to 
simulate NMR processes at the pore scale and to eventually couple 
these equations with transport equations (e.g., Navier–Stokes) in 
a porous medium to investigate and quantify the links between 
NMR and permeability. Due to the limited computing capaci-
ties at that time, however, their investigations where restricted to 
small, simple, two-dimensional pore geometries and respective 
fi nite element meshes. In this study, we developed a multiphys-
ics approach using a FEM to numerically simulate NMR T1 and 
T2 relaxation data at the microscale to study how physical and 
hydrologic parameters aff ect NMR relaxometry data. Th e studied 
parameters that infl uence NMR signals are: internal fi eld gradients, 
pore connectivities, and various diff usion regimes. Th e COMSOL 
Multiphysics programming environment (COMSOL, Burlington, 
MA) was applied to simulate the arbitrary model geometries, 
thereby allowing a multiphysics three-dimensional modeling of 
the NMR behavior of the porous medium model along with the 
electromagnetic properties of the model. Nuclear magnetic reso-
nance signatures can be simulated in both time and eigenvalue 
domains, which allows NMR relaxation times and amplitudes to 
be directly derived without the need for prior processing of the 
time-domain data, e.g., by inverse Laplace transformation. Th is 
approach thus reduces computational costs and avoids ambiguities 
when estimating parameters by inverse modeling.
 6Theory of NMR RelaxaƟ on 
in Porous Media
Th e phenomenon of NMR occurs when the nuclei of certain atoms 
immersed in a static magnetic fi eld B0 are then exposed to a second 
oscillating magnetic fi eld. In hydrologic and petrophysical prac-
tice, usually the nuclear magnetization of H1 in the pore fl uid (e.g., 
water or oil) is relevant (Dunn, 2002; Kenyon, 1997). Th e relax-
ation of observable NMR signals in pore fl uids results from the 
interaction of nuclear spins with their surrounding environment, 
i.e., the bulk fl uid and pore walls.
Bloch–Torrey EquaƟ ons
Th e evolution of magnetization during excitation and the subse-
quent NMR relaxation of the energized nuclei in free fl uid is well 
described with the phenomenological Bloch–T orrey equations 
(Bloch, 1946; Torrey, 1956). Th ey describe the x′, y′, and z com-
ponents of the magnetization vector m as a function of time in the 
rotational frame of reference—precessing along the z axis with the 
angular Larmor frequency ωL = 2πγB0—according to
()
()
 
′
′
′
⎛⎞ ⎟⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟∂ ⎜ ⎟⎜= γ × −− ∇ ∇ ⎟⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟∂ ⎟⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟−⎜⎝⎠
2
ex
2
01
x
y
z
T
Tt
T
m
m mB m D m
mm
 [1]
where m = m(r,t) denotes the magnetization density vector in the 
rotational frame of reference and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the 
protons. Th e diff usion tensor D simplifi es to D = ||D|| in the case 
of isotropic diff usion being assumed in the presented simulations. 
External magnetic fi elds in addition to B0 = (0,0,B0)T  = constant 
are denoted by Bex = [Bx,By,G(r,t)r + Δω(r)/γ]T, where B1 = Bx + 
jBy is the complex oscillating radio frequency (rf) fi eld of the NMR 
excitation pulse and Δω denotes the frequency off set between B1 
and ω0. Th e global external gradient fi eld vector of the static mag-
netic fi eld is given by Gk(r,t) = [Bk(r,t) − B0k]/rk with k = x,y,z.
Th ese relations represent the fundamental equations of motion of 
the magnetic moment vector m by considering diff usion plus an 
additional sink term governing the attenuation of the system to 
equilibrium. Th e relaxation constants T2 and T1 refl ect the homo-
geneous decay of the macroscopic nuclear magnetization (spin-spin 
or transverse relaxation time constant, T2) and energy exchange 
with the surrounding environment (spin-lattice or longitudinal 
relaxation time constant, T1) returning the system to equilibrium 
magnetization density m0(t = 0) = m0uz. Aft er termination of the 
rf excitation fi eld, the external magnetic fi eld vector simplifi es to 
Bex = [0,0,G(r,t)r]T and Eq. [1] can be written as
2
mm jm mtT
⊥⊥
⊥⊥
∂ = −γ − + ∇∇∂ rG D [2a]
0
1
zz
z
mm m mtT
∂− =+ ∇∇∂ D [2b]
where the complex transverse magnetization m⊥ ≡ mx + jmy 
describes the free induction decay (FID) of the transverse magne-
tization in the observational xy plane that, in practice, is mainly 
dominated by signal dephasing of the total magnetization M⊥ due 
to fi eld inhomogeneities (local gradients) in the static fi eld B0. To 
eliminate the complex dephasing term of the transverse magne-
tization in Eq. [2a], and thus refocusing M⊥, a second excitation 
pulse shift ed by 180°, i.e., jγrGm⊥, can be applied aft er a time t = 
τ stimulating a Hahn echo (Hahn, 1950). Th e repetition of such 
a procedure results in the well-known CPMG echo train (Carr 
and Purcell, 1954; Meiboom and Gill, 1958), which is commonly 
used in T2 relaxation experiments. Th e total transverse magnetiza-
tion experiences further irreversible degradation due to dephasing, 
however, as the molecules diff use through the inhomogeneous 
magnetic fi eld during the time interval τ. T o take into account 
such diff usive motion of the excited spins in the presence of a 
magnetic gradient fi eld during the time interval τ, an additional 
time-dependent sink term (irreversible) has to be incorporated into 
Eq. [2a], yielding
() () D 
2
2reversible by irreversible 
Hahn echo (diffusion gradient)
CPMG
FID
m
t
mjm Dt m m T
⊥
⊥
⊥⊥ ⊥
∂ =∂
⎡⎤−γ − γ − +∇∇⎣⎦rG r G r   
   
   
  

 [3]

--- PAGE 3 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 848
for transverse relaxation with a diff usion gradient and FID (e.g., 
Dunn, 2002).
MagneƟ zaƟ on EvoluƟ on 
in a Restricted Pore Space
Considering NMR relaxation in a confi ned system, e.g., a saturated 
porous medium, the relaxation rate of excited nuclei is further 
accelerated due to surface interactions at rock–fl uid interfaces. T o 
explain the NMR relaxation behavior in an environment where 
diff usion is restricted, e.g., a single isolated pore, Brownstein and 
Tarr (1979) introduced Neumann boundary conditions to Eq. [1] 
at the fl uid interfaces, e.g., pore walls.
At the (active) pore surface—i.e., within a thin volume layer of 
thickness d in the range of a few Angstroms near the pore surface 
(Fig. 1)—the excited nuclei experience an accelerated surface relax-
ation rate 1/τs. Th e specifi c mechanism for such relaxation depends 
strongly on the magnetic dipolar interactions of the spins in the 
fl uid with magnetic dipoles within this layer or at the surface of 
the fl uid–rock interface (Torrey, 1956; Foley et al., 1996). Such 
interactions are very short ranged and are commonly assumed to be 
in the range of a few Angstroms. Th e strength of the NMR relax-
ation at the surface is then characterized by the surface relaxivity 
ρs defi ned as ρs ≡ d(1/τs − 1/Tb), where Tb is the relaxation time 
of the bulk fl uid and τs is the surface relaxation time within the 
surface fl uid layer of thickness d.
The dominant mechanism governing the surface relaxation 
processes in porous rocks can be attributed to the hyperfi ne inter-
actions of the fl uid nuclei with paramagnetic centers at the rock 
surfaces, e.g., most commonly Fe3+ and Mn2+. Th ereby, the trans-
versal and longitudinal surface relaxation rates (1/τs1,2) related to 
fl uid nuclei aligned with paramagnetic ions at the rock surface is 
characterized by diff erent multipolar relaxation mechanisms such 
that ρs2/ρs1 ≥ 1 with median experimental values of 1.59 (e.g., 
Korringa et al., 1962; Kleinberg et al., 1993). In this study, how-
ever, we have focused mainly on transverse relaxation processes 
enhanced by diff usion in inhomogeneous magnetic fi elds that 
arise from susceptibility contrasts between the pore fl uid and rock 
matrix (internal gradients) and as such are not related to surface 
relaxation. Th erefore, without loss of generality, we use ρs1 = ρs2 
as a common intrinsic rock property input parameter on the ith 
fraction of active NMR rock surface Si, e.g., ρSi = 10 μm/s:
() () ()
() ()
ˆ,, 0 a c t i v e
ˆ , 0 passive
i
i
Si S
i S
mt D nmt
Dn m t
ρ + ∇ =
∇ =
rr
r
 [4]
where ˆin is the surface outward normal at Si. Th e surface relaxivity 
ρs is then a measure of the loss of magnetization and refl ects the 
molecular interactions at the fl uid boundary S. In this respect, the 
gas–fl uid interface in a partially saturated system would have to 
be treated as a passive boundary. In hydrologic considerations, the 
corresponding fl uid phase would be considered an active volume 
(water), whereas the gas phase (air) would be a noncontributing 
passive volume, i.e., m0(t = 0) = 0. Note, that in case of an NMR 
active second gas or fl uid phase, magnetization (spin) density m0,2 
≠ 0 and diff usion coeffi cient D2 would have to be set accordingly 
for such phase.
Summing up the introduced NMR diff usion Eq. [2b] and [3] 
together with the boundary conditions as given in Eq. [4] allows 
a comprehensive description of the evolution of magnetization in 
a porous medium for time-domain modeling. Th e formulation is 
valid for T
1 relaxation processes and can also be used to calculate 
the FID and transverse relaxation behavior in the presence of inter-
nal and external magnetic gradients.
Considering an experimentally observable scale, the spatially dis-
tributed magnetization densities m integrate to a total eff ective 
macroscopic magnetization:
() ( ) ,d
V
Mt m t r= ∫ r [5]
and
()0 ,0 d
V
Mm t r==∫ r [6]
where V is the total volume of the investigated pore space and M0 
is the eff ective magnetization in equilibrium.
In practice, e.g., to reduce computation time and to directly derive 
relaxation constants, it can be convenient to solve the above dif-
ferential equations not in the time domain but rather in terms of 
their eigenvalues by separating variables according to
() ( ) ()
1
,e x p nn
n
mt E t
∞
=
= −λ∑rr [7]
Substituting m with Eq. [7], the orthogonal eigenfunctions En(r) 
and eigenvalues λn ≡ 1/Tn basically satisfy
1
b
1 ()nn n nED E E TT− + ∇∇ = −λ [8a]
Fig. 1. Conceptual representation of volumetric water fraction and 
surface water fraction with thickness d of an isolated spherical pore 
of radius R.

--- PAGE 4 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 849
() ()
2
2
b
1
nnDt E D E TT
⎧⎫⎪⎪⎪⎪ ⎡⎤−− γ + ∇∇⎨⎬ ⎣⎦⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩⎭
Gr [8b]
() ()
()
2
b
1
FID
nn
nn
jD t E D E T
E
⎧⎫⎪⎪⎪⎪ ⎡⎤−γ + γ ++ ∇∇ =⎨⎬ ⎣⎦⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩⎭
−λ
rG r G r [8c]
for the longitudinal and transverse NMR relaxation behavior. Th e 
boundary conditions for T1, T2, and FID are given by
ˆ 0
ˆ 0
i
i
in sn S
in S
nE E
Dn E
+ ρ =
=
D
 [8d]
for active and passive boundaries, respectively. For simple geom-
etries, e.g., spherical (Fig. 1), cylindrical, or planar shapes, Eq. [8a] 
can be solved analytically. From such considerations, the basic 
relations between NMR T1 relaxation times and the geometrical 
properties of isolated pores, e.g., the pore radius, were derived by 
Brownstein and Tarr (1979) and are commonly used for the inter-
pretation of NMR relaxometry measurements. Th ey described the 
relaxation behavior of magnetization in surface- and diff usion-
limited regimes. In the case of a surface-limited (fast) diff usion 
regime and assuming ds/(v − ds) < < 1, a pore is characterized by a 
single eigenvalue λ, i.e., the NMR-labeled molecules diff use much 
faster to the pore wall than the time it takes for the excited spins 
to decay to the equilibrium state; hence, 
s
1b
11 s
Tv T= ρ + [9a]
for longitudinal relaxation and
sapp
2b 2
11 1 DG s
Tv T T
= − = ρ + [9b]
when considering transverse relaxation times T2
app measured in 
CPMG, where DG is the irreversible diff usion gradient relaxation 
rate due to magnetic gradients, and s/v represents the surface /
volume ratio of the pore. Furthermore, by assuming a constant 
gradient fi eld G(r,t) = constant and linear time steps t = nΔt 
with a constant echo interval (echo time) Δt = 2τ, Eq. [8b] can 
analogously be solved analytically. Th us, the transverse relaxation 
behavior in the presence of a linear (external) magnetic gradient 
fi eld can be derived. Considering nonlinear (internal) magnetic 
gradients, Eq. [8b] and [8c] can only be solved numerically.
Th e analytical solutions of the above equations, however, are only 
valid under the following conditions: (i) relaxation of the nuclei 
begins and ends within the same pore, i.e., pores act independently; 
(ii) surface relaxivity is constant; and (iii) pore geometry is known 
and constant throughout the investigated sample. Therefore, 
to assess the limitations of such approximated solutions and to 
improve the quantitative understanding of T1 and T2 NMR relax-
ation signatures of complex porous systems (e.g., connected pores, 
variations of surface properties due to diff erent rock minerals, the 
impact of internal gradients on derived T2–based pore size distri-
butions and permeability, partial saturation, etc.) the above NMR 
diff usion equations have to be solved numerically.
CalculaƟ on of the Primary MagneƟ c Fields 
(Internal Gradients)
It is well known that internal magnetic fi eld gradients in saturated 
rocks originate from susceptibility contrasts between the pore 
fl uid and the minerals in the rock matrix (e.g., Kleinberg et al., 
1994; Coates et al., 1999; Godefroy et al., 2001). To model the 
increased decay rate observed in the transverse NMR relaxometry, 
i.e., CPMG echo trains and FID, due to the diff usive motion of 
the NMR-labeled molecules in a nonlinear magnetic gradient fi eld 
(internal gradient), the spatial distribution of fi eld gradients within 
the simulated fl uid–matrix system can be calculated according to 
Ampere’s law (Nabighian, 1987):
()0r
1⎡⎤⎢⎥∇× ∇×=⎢⎥μμ⎢⎥⎣⎦
AJr
 
[10]
with
0rand= ∇×= μμBAB H
and outer boundary conditions
0∇×= ∇×HH [11]
at the model limits and with inner continuity requirements
() 12SS
1,2
0
S
∇× − =HH [12]
at interfaces S1,2 between inner model domains such as the 
pore–matrix boundary. Th e global Larmor frequency f0 = γB0 = 
γμ 0μrH0 is defi ned by the static external primary magnetic fi eld 
H0. Th e gradient in the direction of the equilibrium magnetiza-
tion B0 = Bz at the point r is given by G(r) = ∂/∂zB(r). Th e terms 
A, H, and B denote the local magnetic potentials, fi elds, and fl ux 
densities, respectively; μr(r) = 1 + κ(r) is the spatial distribution 
of the magnetic permeability (susceptibility κ) in the system. In 
this study, we set μr
fl uid = 1 and assumed mean values for μr
rock 
throughout the rock matrix and thus μr
rock > μr
fl uid/gas . Dissolved 
ferro- or paramagnetic ions such as Fe 3+ or Mn2+, however, can 
signifi cantly increase the magnetic permeability of the pore fl uid. 
Actually, μr can also exhibit signifi cant variations within a rock 
sample, e.g., due to individual grains or rock fractions with a high 
Fe content. Typically, susceptibility values for sediments and rocks 
range from κ ≤ 10−4 SI (e.g., clean sandstone or silica) up to κ ≥ 
10−2 SI (e.g., volcanic rocks).
Numerical RealizaƟ on
As the description of the evolution of magnetization in the pore 
fl uid is very similar to classical diff erential equations for diff usion 
processes, approaches frequently used in fl uid dynamic sciences can 
be used to solve Eq. [1–3] with boundary conditions according to 

--- PAGE 5 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 850
Eq. [4] in the time domain, e.g., random walk strategies, lattice 
Boltzmann methods (LBMs), or FEMs.
We used COMSOL Multiphysics, a commercial program based 
on fi nite elements that includes simulation toolboxes for general 
convection and diff usion processes in arbitrary three-dimensional 
geometries. Optionally, these models can be linked to other physi-
cal simulations, such as corresponding magnetic fi eld calculations 
(internal gradients), fl uid fl ow, or heat transfer. In the FEM, the 
geometric model is divided into mesh elements (Fig. 2) and the 
above diff erential equations are solved for magnetization densities 
mi(t) at each mesh element i of the model (Zienkiewicz, 2005).
In contrast to random walk methods or LBMs, the FEM approach 
permits the NMR diff usion equations to be solved in their eigen-
value domain, thus signifi cantly reducing the computational cost. 
Consequently, arbitrary pore geometries can be simulated and a 
direct derivation of NMR relaxation times (eigenvalues) can be 
derived directly without the need for consecutive inverse modeling 
in the time domain, e.g., by inverse Laplace transformation.
In this study, we considered only the evolution of magnetization 
densities of the NMR-labeled H2O molecules in the saturated pores, 
i.e., initially m(x,y,z,t = 0) = M0/V. Th e simulations were compiled 
using a medium performance dual core personal computer with 2Gb 
of RAM. Depending on the model design, the computational time 
was generally in the range of several seconds up to a few minutes.
 6Results and Discussion
Model ValidaƟ on Using AnalyƟ cal SoluƟ ons
To validate the simulations, we compared the numerical com-
pilations with analytical solutions that are available for isolated 
pores with simple geometries. Simulation results for an isolated 
spherical pore in surface-dominated (one dominant decay time 
per eigenvalue) and diff usion-dominated (multiple decay times per 
eigenvalue) regimes using 4166 mesh elements are in a very good 
agreement with the analytical results with deviations of <0.1% (Fig. 
3). In comparison, Nguyen and Mardon (1995) used an axial sym-
metry with eight nodes in their initial models.
To validate our simulations with respect to transverse NMR relax-
ation in a gradient fi eld as stated in Eq. [3] and [8b], we simulated 
Fig. 3. Model validation of numerical simulations (fi nite element method [FEM]) of NMR relaxation in (A) time and (B) eigenvalue domains with ana-
lytical solutions (crosses) for a single saturated spherical pore of radius R = 40 μm (diff usion coeffi cient of water D = 2.5 × 10−9 m2/s) in fast (surface 
relaxivity ρs  = 1 μm/s), intermediate (ρs = 15 μm/s), and diff usion-limited regimes (ρs = 75 μm/s).
Fig. 2. Schematic cross-section of a porous medium with fi nite ele-
ment mesh of the pore space and approximated pore radius R of a 
single pore body.

--- PAGE 6 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 851
an unrestricted relaxation environment in free water with an 
intrinsic bulk relaxation time Tb = 3 s. Th e simulations used con-
stant gradients G(r,t) = G = constant throughout the model, with 
a zero surface sink term at the model boundaries, i.e., ρs = 0. In Fig. 
4, the square of the magnetic fi eld gradient is plotted vs. eff ective 
transverse relaxation times at diff erent CPMG echo spacings for 
analytical (lines) and numerical (symbols) calculations. Th e results 
are in good agreement. As DG relaxation becomes the dominant 
term in Eq. [3] for increasing echo times 2 τ and fi eld gradients 
G, the slope of each curve becomes proportional to the diff usion 
constant of the fl uid.
Frequency Dependence of Transverse 
RelaxaƟ on Time Due to Internal Gradients
In NMR applications, the primary static magnetic fi eld B0—usu-
ally generated by strong permanent or electro-magnets—defi nes 
the resonance frequency (Larmor frequency fl) of the investigated 
nuclei, e.g., 1H isotopes. Typically, Larmor frequencies used in 
petrophysical NMR relaxometry range from kilohertz (e.g., the 
Earth’s magnetic fi eld: B0 ? 30−50 μT) up to a few 10s of mega-
hertz (e.g., MRI: B0  ≥ 0.25 T). Th e resulting internal magnetic 
fi eld gradients in rocks stem from susceptibility contrasts between 
the pore fl uids and rock matrix or are due to minerals with dif-
ferent susceptibilities. Such internal gradients naturally increase 
as the fi eld strength of the magnetic fi eld increases, and thus an 
enhanced observed CPMG relaxation rate 1/ T2 will be observed 
at higher Larmor frequencies. Th e dependence of the transverse 
NMR relaxation time on the Larmor frequency as a function of 
susceptibility contrast between pore water and rock matrix in a 
saturated porous rock were simulated for the model of a single 
capillary pore (radius R = 1 μm, ρs  = 10 μm/s) for a frequency 
range of fl = 103 to 107 Hz (Fig. 5).
Th e simulations were compiled for a susceptibility range of κ = 
10−4 SI (e.g., clean sandstone) up to κ = 0.1 SI (e.g., volcanic rocks). 
Th e simulated NMR relaxation times show the strong increase 
in relaxation rates with increasing fi eld strength of B0 and thus 
refl ect the impact of internal gradients on the resulting CPMG 
relaxation measurements in petrophysical NMR. Note that at 
very low B0 fi elds, e.g., with Larmor frequencies in the kilohertz 
range or less, the infl uence of the gradient fi elds becomes less domi-
nant and eventually T2 draws near to the respective T1 relaxation 
times, even for the high κ contrasts utilized in this model. (In 
low magnetic fi elds and negligible internal gradients, T2 ? T1). 
Th erefore, NMR relaxometry experiments at lower magnetic fi elds, 
i.e., low-fi eld NMR, yield a more accurate estimate of petrophysi-
cal properties from T2 relaxation times, with a tradeoff , however, 
toward lower signal amplitudes as the spin magnetization scales 
with magnetic fi eld intensity. On the basis of such numerical case 
studies, the dependency of T2 on both rock susceptibility and 
Larmor frequency can be used to quantify and compensate for 
such interfering infl uences of high susceptibility contrasts when 
deriving pore size distributions from NMR relaxometry.
Enhanced Transverse RelaxaƟ on Time as 
a FuncƟ on of Pore Size in the Presence of 
Internal Gradients
For Larmor frequencies fl  ≤ 4 MHz—which is generally con-
sidered low-field NMR—the diffusion effects for T2 can be 
minimized by using a suffi ciently small echo spacing τ in a CPMG 
experiment. Th en T2 can be used as a T1 proxy to derive pore size 
distributions. In this respect, a constant T2/T1 ratio for all pore 
sizes is assumed (e.g., Kleinberg et al., 1993).
Fig. 4. Finite element method modeling (symbols) and analytical 
solution (lines) for increased NMR relaxation rates due to molecular 
diff usion in a constant magnetic gradient fi eld for bulk water (water 
diff usion coeffi cient D = 2.5 × 10
−9 m2/s) at diff erent echo times τ. 
Th e slope at high gradients is directly proportional to D (γ is the gyro-
magnetic ratio of the protons).
Fig. 5. Nuclear magnetic resonance transverse relaxation times of an 
isolated capillary pore (radius R = 1 μm, surface relaxivity ρ
s = 10 
μm/s) as a function of matrix susceptibility in the presence of internal 
gradients. Simulations were compiled for Larmor frequencies in the 
range 1 kHz (black) up to 10 MHz (light gray).

--- PAGE 7 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 852
In the pore space, however, internal magnetic fi eld gradients, and 
thus the DG, are at a maximum near the pore–rock interfaces, i.e., 
where a high contrast in κ occurs. In Fig. 6, the spatial distribution 
of DG within a saturated capillary pore for a matrix susceptibility 
κmatrix = 10−2 SI, echo spacing τ = 0.5 ms, and Larmor frequency 
fl  = 2 MHz is plotted. Th e relaxation times generally decrease 
toward the pore walls (dark blue), which signifi cantly aff ects the 
resulting eff ective transverse relaxation time of this pore, i.e., T2 = 
0.5 s (no gradient) and T2 = 5.5 × 10−2 s (with internal gradients). 
Following the above considerations in a small pore, a larger fraction 
of its total NMR-labeled volume is aff ected by the gradient fi eld, 
and thus one can assume a higher impact of the diff usion gradi-
ent on T2 NMR signatures that originate from the smaller pores.
To study such a dependence, we simulated longitudinal (T1) and 
transverse ( T2) NMR relaxation signatures of saturated capil-
lary pores in the presence of internal gradients. Th e simulations 
presented in Fig. 7 were calculated for capillary pore geometries 
using a global Larmor frequency of 2 MHz and (frequently used) 
CPMG echo times τ = 0.5 ms. Th e T2/T1 ratios generally show a 
strong dependence on the pore radius that becomes more distinct 
at low surface relaxivities ρs at the walls. Th e T2/T1 ratios are more 
strongly aff ected at low ρs because of the long relaxation times for 
low ρs. In contrast, the short relaxation times at high ρs cannot be 
reduced much further by the diff usion gradient. Actually, as surface 
relaxivity usually refl ects paramagnetic substances at the pore wall, 
e.g., hematite, an additional increase in ρs would be expected with 
increasing internal gradients in a rock sample due to an increased 
surface relaxation rate 1/τs. Even so, the results plotted in Fig. 7 sup-
port a strong relation between pore size and the T2/T1 ratio.
As a consequence of an increase in the rock’s susceptibility, the 
resulting eff ective transverse relaxation times decline. As depicted 
in Fig. 8, such a decrease in T2 strongly depends on the respective 
pore size. Th e simulations show a signifi cant impact on the result-
ing relaxation rates at κ ? 10−2 SI for the large pores ( R = 100 
μm). A signifi cant decrease in eff ective transverse relaxation for 
the small pore sizes ( R = 1 μm) occurs already at κ ? 10−3 SI. In 
practice, it is commonly assumed that ρs does not vary signifi cantly 
throughout the medium, i.e., ρs = constant for all signal-contrib-
uting pores, although there is no direct experimental justifi cation. 
From Eq. [9a] and [9b] it follows that the surface relaxivity for a 
single pore is given by
b
b
with 1 ,2 
k
k
s
k
TT v kTT s
−ρ == [13]
where v/s is the (active) volume to surface ratio of the pore. For a 
pore space consisting of several pore sizes, i.e., integrating over the 
entire pore space, Eq. [13] extends to
b
11b
ˆ ˆwith and 1ˆk
NN
ki
sk i
iiik
TT IV TIST TT ==
−ρ == = ∑∑ [14]
where ˆ
kT is a weighted relaxation time, Ii and Ti are the relative 
signal contribution and respective relaxation time of the ith pore of 
the system (note that this relation is strictly only valid in a surface-
limited diff usion regime), and V = Σvi and S = Σsi are the total 
volume and surface of the system, respectively.
Fig. 7. Ratios of transverse to longitudinal NMR relaxation times 
T2/T1 of saturated isolated capillary pores in the presence of internal 
gradients as a function of the pore radius (model parameters: surface 
relaxivity ρ
s = 1, 10, and 100 μm/s, Larmor frequency fl = 2 MHz, 
matrix susceptibility κ = 0.1 SI).
Fig. 6. Example of the spatial distribution of the diff usion gradient 
term DG in a capillary pore. Model parameters: Larmor frequency fl = 
2 MHz, matrix susceptibility κ = 10−2 SI. Arrows show the direction 
of the static magnetic fi eld B0.

--- PAGE 8 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 853
For the simulations shown in Fig. 8 to 10, a simple capillary 
pore with radius R was used, thus v/s = R/2. Following from 
Eq. [14] with a known volume/surface ratio of the pore model, 
we can derive a pore-size-specific enhanced transverse surface 
relaxivity parameter ρ2s that increases with increasing matrix 
susceptibility (Fig. 9). The parameter ρ2s(κ, R, fl) is then also 
a function of the matrix susceptibility and Larmor frequency 
as well as the pore size and reflects the enhanced transverse 
relaxation rate of the pores due to the internal magnetic field 
gradients in the porous medium.
As illustrated in Fig. 10, on using a constant surface relaxivity value 
(diamonds), i.e., ρ2s = 10 μm/s, to estimate the respective pore 
sizes, the pore radii will be signifi cantly underestimated when the 
susceptibility of the matrix increases beyond a pore-size specifi c 
threshold. Th is susceptibility threshold decreases with decreasing 
pore radii, and thus the size of small pores will be more strongly 
underestimated than large pores. In contrast, when using an 
enhanced surface relaxivity model that takes into account the 
rock susceptibility, the pore radii are estimated correctly (dots). 
Th e slight increase at high susceptibilities is due to the beginning of 
the transition from a surface-limited to a diff usion-limited regime 
of the relaxation processes, i.e., ρ2sR/D > 1. Generally, this suscep-
tibility threshold will shift to smaller values for NMR experiments 
at higher Larmor frequencies and vice versa. Th ese considerations 
concur with observations from laboratory studies on low-porosity 
reservoir rocks (Pape et al., 2009). In practice, to estimate the pore-
size-dependent eff ective surface relaxivity by inverse modeling, the 
susceptibility and porosity (e.g., NMR porosity) of the rock sample 
need to be independently measured. In this context, developing an 
enhanced inverse modeling based on the above simulations is still 
an objective of ongoing research.
Pore Coupling
Common quantitative interpretation of NMR relaxometry 
data in porous media uses the classical relation of NMR relax-
ation times and pore sizes for single isolated pores as derived by 
Brownstein and Tarr (1979). Because the pores are usually con-
nected in porous rocks, the concept of separated individual pores 
is limited for the investigation of coupling between pores, i.e., 
the diff usive motion of NMR-labeled molecules between pores. 
Due to the diff usion constant of water, i.e., the diff usion length, 
however, pore coupling eff ects become more signifi cant in NMR 
relaxometry in rocks with small pore sizes, e.g., in low-porosity 
reservoir rocks, shales, or clay.
Fig. 10. Estimated pore radii from T2 relaxation times using constant 
(diamonds) and eff ective, rock-susceptibility-dependent (dots) surface 
relaxivity estimates (model parameters: surface relaxivity ρs = 10 μm/s, 
Larmor frequency fl = 2 MHz, pore radii R = 1, 10, and 100 μm).
Fig. 8. Eff ective transverse relaxation times in the presence of internal 
gradients for diff erent pore radii R as a function of rock susceptibility 
(model parameters: surface relaxivity ρs = 10 μm/s, Larmor frequency 
fl = 2 MHz, echo time τ = 0.5 ms).
Fig. 9. Derived eff ective transverse surface relaxivities ρ2s for diff erent 
pore radii R as a function of rock susceptibility (model parameters: 
surface relaxivity ρs = 10 μm/s, Larmor frequency fl = 2 MHz).

--- PAGE 9 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 854
A 
simple model of a capillary pore (R = 10 μm) that is connected to four 
smaller pores (R = 5 μm) by thin channels (pore throats) with widths 
10−2 μm is shown in Fig. 11A. Th e total volume of the four small 
pores is equal to the volume of the large pore; thus we obtain equal 
amplitude fractions for each pore size. Simulations of longitudinal 
relaxation (T1) in terms of eigenvalues were performed for diff erent 
throat lengths and widths of this coupled system. Figure 11B shows 
the respective T1 relaxation times and normalized amplitudes for 
throat lengths ranging from 0.1 to 80 μm. Th e arrows indicate the 
corresponding direction of change with decreasing throat length.
Th e coupled system is characterized by two relaxation times that 
each decrease as coupling increases (red arrows). For high throat 
lengths (weak coupling), no signifi cant diff usive exchange between 
pores takes place and the pores can be considered to be isolated, 
with relaxation times of 0.25 and 0.5 s. Th e same relative ampli-
tudes of 0.5 for each pore size refl ect the equal pore volumes of 
large and small pores. When decreasing the throat length and thus 
increasing the coupling strength, however, the fully coupled system 
will eventually be characterized by a single eff ective relaxation con-
stant and a respective normalized signal amplitude of 1. Because 
molecular exchange by diff usion takes place between the pores, 
the pore sizes estimated by the classical approach fail to describe 
this coupled system. Note that as the dominant relaxation time 
of the system converges to an eff ective value, the lower part of the 
spectrum decreases along with its loss in signal strength. Th ese 
implications, relevant for the NMR relaxation behavior of coupled 
pore systems at the pore scale, agree with the results for porous 
medium models obtained by McCall et al. (1991).
Heterogeneity of Surface RelaxiviƟ es
Porous rocks and sediments usually are composed of fractions of dif-
ferent mineral grains such as quartz, clay, or hematite. Naturally such 
minerals can have diff erent properties with respect to their paramag-
netic ion content at the inner surfaces and thus show highly diff erent 
mineral-specifi c surface relaxivities, i.e., ρs
quartz << ρs
hematite.
In practice, to estimate pore sizes from NMR relaxometry 
relaxation data, eff ective mean values of ρs are derived with uncer-
tainties due to measurement errors. Additionally, there will also 
be deviations caused by the mineral grain distributions within the 
rock matrix. Such natural noise usually cannot be accounted for, 
and information with respect to its infl uence and signifi cance on 
the derivation of pore parameters is not well known.
T o assess such infl uences for fast- and slow-diff usion NMR relax-
ation regimes, we set up a simple model box (Fig. 12) of 144 
Fig. 11. (A) Model of a coupled pore system of a large pore (radius R 
= 10 μm) and four small pores (R = 5 μm), where the colors illustrate 
an example eigenfunctions log[ En(r)] of the simulated data; and (B) 
simulation of longitudinal relaxation time T1 distributions for throat 
lengths ranging from 0.1 to 80 μm (model parameters: surface relax-
ivity ρs  = 10 μm/s, throat width 0.1 μm). Th e arrows indicate the 
corresponding direction of change with decreasing throat length.
Fig. 12. Sections of a model box with 144 grains with randomly 
assigned low (1 μm/s) and high (50 μm/s) surface relaxivities for 
model realizations with (A) 0%, (B) 25%, (C) 75%, and (D) 100% 
high-relaxivity grain surfaces . Th e color code refl ects the spatial dis-
tribution of the pore fl uid’s transverse magnetization density aft er the 
fi rst Carr –Purcell–Meiboom–Gill (CPMG) echo (τ = 0.5 ms).

--- PAGE 10 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 855
spherical mineral grains (grain radii R = 1 and 10 μm for fast 
and slow diff usion, respectively), which were assigned low ( ρs
a 
= 1 μm/s) and high (fast diff usion models: ρs
b = 50 μm/s; slow 
diff usion models: ρs
b = 100 μm/s) surface relaxivities, represent-
ing clean (e.g., quartz) and impure (e.g., hematite) mineral grains. 
Th ese two surface properties were assigned randomly to the grains 
in the models. Figures 12A to 12D illustrate examples of random 
realizations (fast-diff usion model) of transverse magnetization 
density at the fi rst CPMG echo ( τ = 0.5 ms) for diff erent frac-
tions (0, 25, 75, and 100%) of high-relaxivity grains. Simulated 
data (fast-diff usion regime) of 50 random realizations for diff er-
ent fractions (0–100%) of high-relaxivity grains in the model are 
plotted in Fig. 13A (time domain) and 13B (eigenvalue domain). 
Dashed lines represent the limits for 0 and 100% high-relaxivity 
grain contents. Figures 14A to 14C illustrate three excerpts for 
high-relaxivity grain contents of 6, 20, and 60%. Here, a bimodal 
eigenvalue distribution at low ρs
b grain contents, i.e., isolated 
occurrences of ρs
b grains, converges to a weighted mean mono-
modal relaxation behavior with increasing high-relaxivity grain 
contents. Similar simulations compiled for diffusion-limited 
relaxation, i.e., grain sizes are upscaled by a factor of 10 and ρs
b = 
100 μm/s, are plotted in Fig. 15. Here, at 0% high-relaxivity grain 
content, the relaxation is purely surface limited. Upon introducing 
high-relaxivity grain fractions to the model, the relaxation behav-
ior becomes increasingly diff usion limited, and thus the system 
becomes characterized by an ensemble of relaxation times (e.g., Fig. 
16, bottom). Upon increasing the fraction of high-relaxivity grains, 
the characteristic eigenvalues λ of the system increase along with 
an increased scattering of mean relaxation times and subsequently 
derived surface relaxivities for the 50 model realizations (indices 
1–50). As expected, the scattering appears generally stronger in the 
surface-limited diff usion environment. If the model’s total volume 
and surface area are known, Eq. [14] can be used to estimate the 
surface relaxivities and thus derive pore sizes from the simulated 
relaxation data (Fig. 17 and 18). Th e eff ective surface relaxivity of 
the system increases exponentially with increasing content of ρs
b 
grain surfaces.
Th e derived eff ective pore sizes for the fast-diff usion model, i.e., 
volume/surface ratios, were generally found to be in very good 
agreement of <1% with the model. In the case of intermediate 
to slow diff usion, however, the derived mean surface relaxivities 
were typically underestimated due to the resulting faster eff ective 
relaxation rates. Consequently, the deduced pore sizes were under-
estimated, exhibiting a maximum deviation ( ?15%) from the 
model at 20% high-susceptibility grain fraction. Th is maximum 
deviation can be attributed to a stronger impact from clustering 
Fig. 13. Simulations with randomly distributed low (1 μm/s) and high 
(50 μm/s) grain surface relaxivities with 10 to 90% high-relaxivity 
(ρs
b) grain content, each with 50 random model realizations: (A) 
transverse relaxation curves; (B) eigenvalues (= decay times). Dashed 
lines show lower and upper boundaries for homogeneous low and 
high surface relaxivities.
Fig. 14. Fast diff usion: NMR transverse relaxation simulations in the 
time domain (top) and eigenvalue (relaxation constant) domain (bot-
tom) for 6, 20, and 60% high surface relaxivity ( ρ
s
b) grain content 
(excerpts from Fig. 13).
Fig. 15. Slow diff usion: simulations with randomly distributed low (1 
μm/s) and high (50 μm/s) grain surface relaxivities with 10 to 90% 
high-relaxivity (ρs
b) grain content, each with 50 random model real-
izations: (A) transverse relaxation curves; (B) eigenvalues (= decay 
times). Dashed lines show lower and upper boundaries for homoge-
neous low and high surface relaxivities. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 856
(e.g., compare Fig. 12B and 12C), which then promotes the devel-
opment of two distinct slow and fast relaxation regimes within the 
model. Furthermore, coupling between pore fractions of the model 
will also contribute, however, being of only minor signifi cance in 
the presented models.
 6Conclusion and Outlook
Pore-scale simulations of longitudinal and transverse NMR relax-
ation signatures, taking into account the enhanced T2 relaxation 
rates that arise in the presence of internal magnetic gradients in 
porous rocks and sediments, were implemented in a multiphys-
ics fi nite elements program. Th e simulations can be compiled for 
arbitrary pore geometries with spatial distributions of surface 
and magnetic properties of the fl uid and rock, and thus allow the 
fundamental NMR relaxation behavior to be studied in complex 
pore systems, e.g., derived from computed tomography. Th e fi nite 
element approach permits the NMR diff usion equations to be 
solved in their eigenvalue domain and thus the NMR relaxation 
times (eigenvalues) to be directly derived. Th e computational 
cost can thereby be signifi cantly reduced and simulations can be 
compiled in two and also in three dimensions using a standard 
personal computer.
Simulations of transverse NMR relaxometry data support previous 
observations (e.g., Pape et al., 2009) indicating that the use of T2 
distributions as a permeability estimator tends to overestimate the 
contribution of smaller pores and thus to underestimate the rock 
permeability. To compensate for this drawback, the concept of an 
enhanced transverse surface relaxivity parameter that depends on 
pore size and rock susceptibility was introduced.
Modeling of the transverse relaxation behavior refl ects the fre-
quency dependence of internal gradients in the rocks, which, in 
principle, could be used to derive eff ective surface relaxivities by 
inverse modeling or enhancing existing (semi)empirical models. 
Th erefore, it seems promising to apply such an approach to data 
obtained from frequency-dependent NMR relaxometry data, e.g., 
utilizing transverse NMR data recorded at two diff erent Larmor 
frequencies, to better estimate pore-size distributions and perme-
ability. In this context, from the observed shift s of the transverse 
relaxation times at diff erent frequencies, it seems promising to 
quantify frequency- and pore-size-related eff ective surface relax-
ivities and thus derive more reliable permeability estimates, in 
particular, for low-porosity reservoir rocks, shales, or clay. Direct 
simulations of connected pores at the pore scale confi rm an aver-
aging of decay times along with an overall shift to higher decay 
rates related to the coupling strengths within the pore system. 
Simulated NMR signatures of random grain mixtures indicated 
that, depending on the dominant diff usion regime, the commonly 
heterogeneous distribution of surface relaxivities in rocks and 
sediments, i.e., geological noise, can lead to a signifi cant underes-
timation of derived pore sizes and thus of permeability.
Fig. 18. Slow diff usion: derived surface relaxivities and pore size for 50 
realizations of random distributions of low (1 μm/s) and high (100 
μm/s) surface relaxivity pairs ( ρs
a,b) in the model box (Fig. 12): (A) 
eff ective relaxivities (dots) derived according to Eq. [14] (lines); (B) 
high surface relaxivity grain fraction vs. mean surface relaxivity (dots) 
and consecutively derived pore sizes volume/surface area (v/s, squares).
Fig. 16. Slow diff usion: NMR transverse relaxation simulations in 
the time domain (top) and eigenvalue (relaxation constant) domain 
(bottom) for 6, 20, and 60% high surface relaxivity (ρ
s
b) grain content 
(excerpts from Fig. 15).
Fig. 17. Fast diff usion: derived surface relaxivities and inner surfaces 
for 50 realizations of random distributions of low (1 μm/s) and high 
(50 μm/s) surface relaxivity pairs (ρs
a,b) in the model box (Fig. 12): (A) 
eff ective relaxivities (dots) derived according to Eq. [14] (lines); (B) 
high surface relaxivity grain fraction vs. mean surface relaxivity (dots) 
and consecutively derived pore sizes volume/surface area (v/s, squares).

--- PAGE 12 ---
www.VadoseZoneJournal.org | 857
On the basis of such pore-scale simulations, we aim to implement 
an NMR interpretation scheme for T2 relaxometry data that will 
take into account pore-size-dependent transverse relaxation rates 
due to susceptibility contrasts between the rock and pore fl uid. 
Using the presented fi nite element approach, simulations can be 
readily compiled for multiphase systems and thus will also be used 
in further studies to correlate the NMR properties and hydrologic 
parameters of partially saturated rocks, e.g., to derive the relative 
permeability and to study the transport properties of fi lm fl ow. 
In a next step to further investigate and quantify the relationship 
between NMR and the transport properties of porous media, we 
will jointly simulate NMR and fl uid fl ow (e.g., Navier–Stokes).
Acknowledgments
Th is study was conducted within the framework of the T ransregional Collabora-
tive Research Centre 32 (SFB TR 32). W e thank the German Research Foundation 
(DFG) for funding.
References
Bloch, F. 1946. Nuclear inducƟ on. Phys. Rev. 70:460–474.
 Brownstein, K., and C. Tarr. 1979. Importance of classical di ﬀ usion in NMR 
studies of water in biological cells. Phys. Rev. A 19:2446–2453. 
Bryar, T., C.J. Daughney, and R. Knight. 2000. ParamagneƟ c eﬀ ects of iron(III) 
species on nuclear magneƟ c relaxaƟ on of ﬂ uid protons in porous media. 
J. Magn. Reson. 142:74–85. 
Carman, P . 1956. Flow of gases through porous media. BuƩ erworths, London. 
Carr, H., and E. Purcell. 1954. Eﬀ ects of diﬀ usion on free precession in nuclear 
magneƟ c resonance experiments. Phys. Rev. 94:630–638. 
Coates, G.R., L. Xiao, and M.G. Prammer. 1999. NMR logging: Principles and 
applicaƟ ons. Halliburton Energy Serv., Houston, TX. 
Dunn, K.-J. D.J. Bergman. and G.A. Latorraca. 2002. Nuclear magne Ɵ c reso-
nance: Petrophysical and logging applicaƟ ons. Handbk. Geophys. Explor. 
32. Elsevier Science, Kidlington, UK. 
Foley, I., S. Farooqui, and R. Kleinberg. 1996. Effect of paramagnetic ions 
on NMR relaxation of fluids at solid interfaces. J. Magn. Reson. A 
123:95–104. 
Godefroy, S., J. Korb, M. Fleury, and R. Bryant. 2001. Surface nuclear mag-
neƟ c relaxa Ɵ on and dynamics of water and oil in macroporous media. 
Phys. Rev. E 64:021605, doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.64.021605. 
Hahn, E. 1950. Spin echoes. Phys. Rev. 80:580–594. 
KeaƟ ng, K., and R. Knight. 2007. A laboratory study to determine the eﬀ ect of 
iron oxides on proton NMR measurements. Geophysics 72:27–32. 
Kenyon, W. 1997. Petrophysical principles of applica Ɵ ons of NMR logging. 
Log Anal. 38(2):21–43. 
Kenyon, W., P . Dahl, C. Straley, and J. Willemsen. 1988. A three-part study of 
NMR longitudinal relaxa Ɵ on proper Ɵ es of water-saturated sandstones. 
SPE Form. Eval. 3:622–636. 
Kleinberg, R., S. Forooqui, and M. Horsﬁ eld. 1993. T
1/T2 raƟ o and frequency 
dependence of NMR relaxa Ɵ on in porous sedimentary rocks. J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 158:195–198. 
Kleinberg, R., W. Kenyon, and P . Mitra. 1994. Mechanism of NMR relaxaƟ on 
of ﬂ uids in rock. J. Magn. Reson. A 108:206–214. 
Korringa, J., D. Seevers, and H. Torrey. 1962. Theory of spin pumping and re-
laxaƟ on in systems with a low concentra Ɵ on of electron spin resonance 
centers. Phys. Rev. 127:1143–1150. 
McCall, K., D. Johnson, and R. Guyer. 1991. Magne Ɵ zaƟ on evoluƟ on in con-
nected pore systems. Phys. Rev. B 44:7344–7355. 
Meiboom, S., and D. Gill. 1958. Modi ﬁ ed spin-echo method for measuring 
nuclear relaxaƟ on Ɵ mes. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 29:688–691. 
Nabighian, M. 1987. ElectromagneƟ c methods in applied geophysics. Vol. 1. 
Theory. Soc. Explor. Geophys., Tulsa, OK. 
Nguyen, S., and D. Mardon. 1995. A p-version ﬁ nite element formula Ɵ on 
for modeling magne Ɵ c resonance relaxa Ɵ on in porous media. Comput. 
Geosci. 21:51–60. 
Pape, H., J. Arnold, R. Pechnig, C. Clauser, E. Talnishnikh, S. Anferova, and B. 
Blümich. 2009. Permeability predicƟ on for low porosity rocks by mobile 
NMR. Pure Appl. Geophys. 166:1125–1163. 
Sen, P ., C. Straley, W. Kenyon, and M. Whiƫ ngham. 1990. Surface-to-volume 
raƟ o, charge density, nuclear magne Ɵ c relaxa Ɵ on, and permeability in 
clay-bearing sandstones. Geophysics 55:61–69. 
Torrey, H. 1956. Bloch equaƟ ons with diﬀ usion terms. Phys. Rev. 104:563–565. 
Zienkiewicz, O. 2005. The ﬁ nite element method. 6th ed. BuƩ erworths, London.