--- PAGE 1 ---
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/301575417
Random Walk Methods for Modeling Hydrodynamic Transport in Porous and
Fractured Media from Pore to Reservoir Scale
Article  in  Transport in Porous Media · November 2016
DOI: 10.1007/s11242-016-0693-z
CITATIONS
74
READS
553
8 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
CO2 sequestration View project
Characterization of fractured rocks View project
Benoit Noetinger
IFP Energies nouvelles
130 PUBLICATIONS   2,267 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Delphine Roubinet
CNRS
33 PUBLICATIONS   397 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Anna Russian
Politecnico di Milano
20 PUBLICATIONS   469 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Marco Dentz
Spanish National Research Council
288 PUBLICATIONS   7,654 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Delphine Roubinet on 10 January 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Random walk methods for modeling hydrodynamic
transport in porous and fractured media from pore to
reservoir scale
Benoit Noetinger · Delphine Roubinet ·
Anna Russian · Tanguy Le Borgne ·
Frederick Delay · Marco Dentz ·
Jean-Raynald de Dreuzy · Philippe Gouze
This work is published in Transport in Porous Media, please cite as:
Noetinger, B., D. Roubinet, A. Russian, T. Le Borgne, F. Delay , M. Dentz, J.-R. de
Dreuzy , and P . Gouze (2016), Random walk methods for modeling hydrodynamic
transport in porous and fractured media from pore to reservoir scale, T ransport
in Porous Media, 1-41, doi:10.1007/s11242-016-0693-z
Abstract Random walk (RW) methods are recurring Monte Carlo methods used
to model convective and diﬀusive transport in complex heterogeneous media. Many
applications can be found, including ﬂuid mechanic, hydrology, and chemical re-
actors modeling. These methods are easy to implement, very versatile and ﬂexible
enough to become appealing for many applications because they generally overlook
or deeply simplify the building of explicit complex meshes required by deterministic
methods. RW provide a good physical understanding of the interactions between
the space scales of heterogeneities and the transport phenomena under consider-
ation. In addition, they can result in eﬃcient up-scaling methods, especially in
B. Noetinger
IFPEN 1-4 avenue de Bois Pr´ eau, 92852, France
E-mail: benoit.noetinger@ifpen.fr
D. Roubinet
Applied and Environmental Geophysics Group, Institute of Earth Sciences, University of Lau-
sanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
A. Russian
G´ eosciences, Universit´ e de Montpellier 2, CNRS
T. le Borgne
Universit´ e de Rennes 1, CNRS, G´ eosciences Rennes, UMR 6118, Rennes, France
F. Delay
Laboratoire dHydrologie et de G´ eochimie de Strasbourg, Univ. Strasbourg/EOST, CNRS
UMR 7517, 1 rue Blessig, 67000 Strasbourg, France
M. Dentz
Institute of Environmental Assessment and Water Research, Spanish National Research Coun-
cil, Barcelona, Spain
J.R. de Dreuzy
G´ eosciences Rennes, CNRS, UMR 6118, Rennes, France
P. Gouze
G´ eosciences, Universit´ e de Montpellier 2, CNRS

--- PAGE 3 ---
2 Benoit Noetinger et al.
the context of ﬂow and transport in fractured media. In the present study, we
review the applications of RW to several situations that cope with diverse spatial
scales, and diﬀerent insights into up-scaling problems. The advantages and down-
sides of RW are also discussed, thus providing a few avenues for further works and
applications.
Keywords Random walk · Random Media · Fractured media · Diﬀusion·
Dispersion· Up-scaling· Transfers· Multiple Porosity
1 Introduction
In the early 20 th century, thanks to seminal contributions of major scientists
such as Einstein, Langevin, le Chatelier and Wiener among others, the Random
walk (RW) approach introduced the ﬁrst quantiﬁed depiction of brownian motion
which resulted in a fruitful microscopic picture of the diﬀusion mechanism (Scher
et al, 2002a). The conceptual simplicity of RW associated with its easiness of im-
plementation were conductive to a fast dissemination of associated techniques and
algorithms in many areas of science, from biology and colloidal science to modern
ﬁnance, including statistical physics, chemical engineering, and geosciences. Re-
garding the latter topic, many applications can be found in the ﬁeld of hydrology,
oil and gas industry or subsurface repository of various wastes. As an illustration,
RW techniques can also be employed as a direct simulation technique for passive
tracer or pollutant transport in aquifers (Kinzelbach, 1988; Kinzelbach and Uﬃnk,
1991; Zimmermann et al, 2001; Hoteit et al, 2002b; Delay et al, 2005). At the labo-
ratory scale, the recent advances in the imaging techniques of rock textures provide
high resolution pictures of the pore space (Nunes et al, 2015). This very exhaus-
tive and complex information needs for post-processing aimed at inferring eﬀective
transport properties in porous media such as permeability, porosity, and electrical
conductivity, to mention a few. For example, electrical conductivity was ﬁrst com-
puted using RW by Kim and Torquato (1992) and several authors ((Sahimi, 2011)
and reference therein). At the same pore-to-sample scale, RW techniques were also
used to interpret Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) data (N´ eel et al, 2011, 2014;
Guillon et al, 2013, 2014; Fleury et al, 2015). At a larger scale, typically from m
to km, a major issue of various applications, especially those performing ﬂow and
transport simulations in subsurface reservoirs, is the capability of accounting for
the detailed natural variability of the host medium with the maximum accuracy
over objects of large sizes (typically several km in the case of aquifers or oil & gas
reservoirs). These applications range from a better understanding of the fate of
pollutants in the subsurface, to improving oil and gas recovery. At the large scale,
most calculations are still performed using Finite Volume, Finite Diﬀerence or Fi-
nite Element approaches requiring a high resolution and cumbersome meshing to
represent the geometry of the modeled domain. However, because the size of an
elementary mesh is often too large, discrete descriptions of the domain may also
require the availability of eﬀective transport equations at the scale of the mesh and
accounting for eventual unresolved sub-grid scale eﬀects. In most cases, it is as-
sumed that transport is still ruled by the Advection Dispersion Equation (ADE)
which is of questionable validity at the small scale (Matheron and de Marsily,
1980; Bouchaud and Georges, 1990; Berkowitz and Scher, 1998; Berkowitz et al,

--- PAGE 4 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 3
2000; Scher et al, 2002a; N´ eel et al, 2011). In addition, the parameters associ-
ated with ﬂow and transport are usually poorly known a priori and have to be
inferred by facing model outputs with available data. RW techniques are good
candidates for both identifying sub-grid eﬀects and parameters (Berkowitz and
Balberg, 1993; N´ eel et al, 2011). In particular, obtaining valuable descriptions
of transport in low permeability media concealing widespread heterogeneities in-
volving stagnant zones, adsorption and chemical reactions properties is of major
interest. These highly disordered media can exhibit very rich anomalous transport
properties preventing any classical description relying upon standard Darcy’s law
and ADE. RW methods can for instance represent ”fractional derivative” trans-
port equation accounting for memory eﬀects over wide ranges of time (Matheron
and de Marsily, 1980; O’Shaughnessy and Procaccia, 1985; Charlaix et al, 1987;
Barker, 1988; Chang and Yortsos, 1990; Bouchaud and Georges, 1990; Metzler
et al, 1994; Noetinger and Gautier, 1998; Metzler and Klafter, 2000). In the ex-
treme case of fractured media, Continuous Time Random Walk (CTRW) or Time
Domain Random Walk (TDRW) algorithms techniques were successfully employed
to determine transfer functions that are key for implementing the so called dual
porosity models (Noetinger and Estebenet, 2000; Noetinger et al, 2001a,b).
RW algorithms are very well suited to capture the motion and the spreading
of a diﬀusive set of particles representing a tracer plume in an advecting ﬂow ﬁeld.
The rather subtle interplay between molecular diﬀusion and the heterogeneous
velocity ﬁeld can be simulated directly, resulting in a clear physical interpretation
of the relevant characteristic times and scales prevailing during transport. Ana-
lytical results of the Taylor and Aris (Taylor, 1954; Aris, 1956) dispersion can
be retrieved (Salles et al, 1993). In turn, these results can be used to estimate
dispersivity in more complex geometries. In the case of spatially varying diﬀusion
coeﬃcients, including discontinuous cases, the RW may experience some diﬃcul-
ties. To avoid spurious accumulation of particles in low diﬀusivity zones, some
”reﬂection rules” have to be imposed at the locations of discontinuities (Kinzel-
bach, 1988; Kinzelbach and Uﬃnk, 1991; Hoteit et al, 2002b). In addition, the
algorithm can become ineﬃcient in low diﬀusivity zones because the spatial time
step needed for an accurate resolution of transport can become very small. Both
issues can be corrected using suitable time step increments that avoid expansive
and unnecessary iterations in low velocity and low diﬀusion zones. The main idea
is using ﬁxed spatial meshes instead of even time steps. In that framework, RW
methods loose their original ”meshless character”, and are found to be connected
to usual Finite Volume schemes. This leads to model diﬀusion over a ﬁxed lat-
tice or graph that can be built with standard meshing tools. For its part, the
residence time at a given site becomes a random variable, with the consequence
that the resulting algorithm belongs to a wider class of techniques, namely the
Time Domain Random Walk (TDRW). These TDRW algorithms are also partic-
ularly well suited to implementations on highly parallel computing resources. An
additional interest is that the resulting formulation is quite close to the classical
solutions as that provided by standard numerical analysis. Anomalous dispersion
eﬀects mainly due to the persistence of large scale correlations in a ﬂow ﬁeld can
thus be simulated using RW with suitable kernels (Berkowitz and Scher, 1998;
Berkowitz et al, 2000; N´ eel et al, 2011; Scher et al, 2002a,b). For their numerical
part, RW methods can be implemented using structured or unstructured meshes,
which allows to tackle the problem of diﬀusion in very complex media, includ-

--- PAGE 5 ---
4 Benoit Noetinger et al.
ing fracture networks (Noetinger and Estebenet, 2000; Noetinger et al, 2001a,b;
Roubinet et al, 2010, 2013). Adsorption phenomena, as well as chemical reactions
can also be accounted for. By nature, RW methods are very well suited for highly
parallel computing architectures which reveals useful to perform calculations over
complex domains or when moving multiple reacting species in solution.
RW methods provide interesting insights into transport mechanisms that can
enlighten us about our understanding of mixing processes in disordered ﬂows. In
the case of fractured media, a careful interpretation of the output of RW sim-
ulations give eﬃcient and direct tools to parameterize multiple porosity large
scale models by way of a complete determination of transient transfer functions
(Noetinger and Estebenet, 2000; Noetinger et al, 2001a,b; Roubinet et al, 2010,
2013). These functions can thus help to pattern multiple rate transfer models
(Haggerty and Gorelick, 1995) or Multiple Interacting Continua (MINC) models
(Narasimhan and Pruess, 1988). Characteristic exponents associated with anoma-
lous diﬀusion/dispersion processes can be estimated using RW methods (de Ar-
cangelis et al, 1986; Berkowitz and Scher, 1997; McCarthy, 1993a; Koplik et al,
1988; Bouchaud and Georges, 1990), as well as the REV or mixing lengths, even
if large scale practical simulations still remain the playing ﬁeld of conventional
meshed models.
The goal of the present paper is to review the state of the art regarding appli-
cations of RW, TDRW or CTRW to the up scaling of ﬂows and mass transfers in
heterogeneous and fractured media.
The contribution is organized as follows. We ﬁrst review in section 2.4 the un-
derlying theory of RW algorithms for solving an advection diﬀusion equation. We
focus on TDRW that solves spatially discretized equations having the same form
than those arising from Finite Volume discretization of advection dispersion opera-
tors. Next, numerical issues are addressed, from fully coupled advection dispersion
diﬀusion equations 3 to purely diﬀusive issues including heterogeneous, fractured
media and the double porosity large scale description 3.3. These models can be
generalized to Multiple Rate Transfer Models involving transfer functions between
the matrix and the fractures that can be evaluated using TDRW techniques. In
a next section 3.5, application of RW to understanding and modeling mixing are
discussed. Applications from pore to ﬁeld scale 4, including radial ﬂows in the
vicinity of wells are discussed. Finally, some other applications are discussed and
some conclusions and avenues for future research are discussed.
2 Theoretical Background for Random Walk Methods
This section summarizes the basis on which random walk methods are built to de-
scribe solute transport in heterogeneous media. We start with classical or discrete
time random walks, then brieﬂy review its generalization to the continuous time
random walk (CTRW) framework. Based on the CTRW approach, we report on the
fundaments of the time domain random walk method (TDRW). Finally, we review
the use of the CTRW as an averaging framework for transport in heterogeneous
media.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 5
2.1 Classical (Discrete-Time) Random Walks
Classical random walk particle tracking is based on the equivalence between the
Fokker-Planck equation and the equation of motion of solute particles subject to
advective and diﬀusive-dispersive mass transfer. A general Fokker-Planck equation
for the scalar quantity P (x,t ) can be written as (Risken, 1996)
∂P (x,t )
∂t +∇· [v(x)P (x,t )] +∇⊗∇ : [B(x)P (x,t )] = 0, (1)
where⊗ denotes the outer and : the inner tensor product. The drift vector and
dispersion tensor are denoted by v(x) and B(x), respectively. As shown in Ap-
pendix A, this Fokker-Planck equation is exactly equivalent to the Langevin equa-
tion
dx(t)
dt = v[x(t)] +
√
2B[x(t)]· ζ(t), (2)
where
√
B(x) is the square-root of the tensor B(x), ζ(t) denotes a Gaussian white
noise characterized by zero mean⟨ζ(t)⟩ = 0 and variance⟨ζi(t)ζj(t′)⟩ =δijδ(t−t′).
The angular brackets denote the noise average over all particles. The particle
distribution P (x,t ) can be written in terms of the particle trajectories x(t) as
P (x,t ) =⟨δ[x− x(t)]⟩. (3)
We name this modeling approach as a discrete time random walk because particle
positions are incremented in constant time intervals as
x(t +dt) = x(t) + v[x(t)]dt +
√
2B[x(t)]· η(t), η(t) =
t+dt∫
t
dt′ζ(t′). (4)
Note that we use here the Ito interpretation of the stochastic integral (Risken,
1996). The random increment η(t) has zero mean and variance⟨ηi(t)ηj(t)⟩ =δijdt.
Solute or heat transport as well as hydraulic head propagation in a heteroge-
neous porous medium are not in general described by a Fokker-Planck equation of
the form (1), but the advection dispersion equation (ADE) for the scalar c(x,t )
φ(x)∂c(x,t )
∂t +∇· [u(x)c(x,t )]−∇· [D(x)∇c(x,t )] = 0. (5)
For solute transport c(x,t ) denotes the concentration, φ(x) is the porosity and
D(x) is the hydrodynamic dispersion tensor. For hydraulic head propagation, we
set the ﬂow velocity u(x) = 0, φ(x) denotes the speciﬁc storage and D(x) is the
hydraulic conductivity tensor. It is important to note that c(x,t ) in (5) is not a
conserved quantity because it is φ(x)c(x,t ) that is conserved. Thus, introducing
P (x,t ) =φ(x)c(x,t ), (6)
which satisﬁes the equation
∂P (x,t )
∂t +∇·
[u(x)
φ(x)P (x,t )
]
−∇·
[
D(x)∇P (x,t )
φ(x)
]
= 0. (7)

--- PAGE 7 ---
6 Benoit Noetinger et al.
We can reformulate this equation in the form of the Fokker-Planck equation (1)
as
∂P (x,t )
∂t +∇·
[u(x)
φ(x) +∇· D(x)
φ(x)
]
P (x,t )−∇⊗∇ :
[D(x)
φ(x)P (x,t )
]
= 0. (8)
Through the equivalence between (1) and (2), we ﬁnd the Langevin equation that
is equivalent to (5) as (Kinzelbach, 1988)
dx(t)
dt = u[x(t)]
φ[x(t)] +∇· D[x(t)]
φ[x(t)] +
√
2D[x(t)]
φ[x(t)] · ζ(t). (9)
The solute concentrationc(x,t ) is given in terms of the particle trajectories through (3)
and (6) as
c(x,t ) =⟨δ[x− x(t)]⟩
φ(x) . (10)
2.2 Continuous Time Random Walks
We present here a generalization of the previous depiction of discrete time random
walk to continuous time (Berkowitz et al, 2002, 2006). The particle position and
time are now incremented at each random walk step as
xn+1 = xn + A(xn), t n+1 =tn +τ(xn). (11)
The random space and time increments A(xn) and τ(xn) depend in general on
the particle position and they can be coupled (Scher and Lax, 1973a), and char-
acterized by their joint probability density function (PDF) ψ(a,t ; x). Notice that
both space and time are continuous variables. The particle density P (x,t ) can be
described by the following system of equations (Berkowitz et al, 2002; Srinivasan
et al, 2010)
P (x,t ) =
t∫
0
dt′R(x,t′)
∞∫
t−t′
dt′′ψ(t′′; x) (12a)
R(x,t ) =P (x,t )δ(t) +
∫
da
t∫
0
dt′ψ(a,t′; x− a)R(x− a,t−t′). (12b)
The ﬁrst equation states that the probability of a particle to be in the volume
[x, x+dx] at timet is equal to the probabilityR(x,t′) that the particle just arrive
in the volume [x, x+dx] at a time in [t′,t′ +dt′] and remains there for the duration
of t−t′. The marginal PDF of transition times is given by
ψ(t; x) =
∫
daψ(a,t ; x). (13)
The second equation of 12 can be viewed as a Chapman Kolmogorov equation
for the probability density R(x,t ). The linear system (12) can be solved for the

--- PAGE 8 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 7
Laplace transform (Abramowitz and Stegun, 1972) of the particle density P (x,t ),
which gives after some algebra the integral equation: 1
sP (x,s ) =P (x, 0) +
∫
dasψ(a,s ; x− a)
1−ψ(s; x− a)P (x− a,s )
∫
dasψ(a,s ; x)
1−ψ(s; x)P (x,s ). (14)
Inverse Laplace transform gives the generalized Master equation (Kenkre et al,
1973)
dP (x,t )
dt =
t∫
0
dt′
∫
daM(a,t ; x− a)P (x− a,t )
−
t∫
0
dt′
∫
daM(a,t ; x− a)P (x,t ), (15)
where we deﬁne the memory function
M(a,s ; x) = sψ(a,s ; x)
1−ψ(s; x). (16)
Under the assumption that M(a,t ; x− a) is sharply peaked around 0 the spatial
convolution in (15) may be localized through a Taylor expansion of the integrand
about x (Berkowitz et al, 2002) such that
∂P (x,t )
∂t +
t∫
0
dt′∇·
[
ν(x,t−t′)P (x,t′)
]
−
t∫
0
dt′∇⊗∇·
[
β(x,t−t′)P (x,t′)
]
+··· = 0, (17)
where the dots represent higher order contributions in the moments of M(a,t ; x).
Notably, the velocity and dispersion kernels ν(x,t ) and β(x,t ) have been deﬁned
in (17) as
ν(x,t ) =
∫
da aM(a,t ; x), β(x,t ) =
∫
da a⊗ aM(a,t ; x). (18)
2.3 Time Domain Random Walks
Time domain random walk (TDRW) methods have been used as eﬃcient alter-
natives to discrete time random walks for the solution of solute transport and
ﬂow problems in heterogeneous media as described by (5). Complementary to the
classical discrete time random walk approach, the TDRW ﬁxes the spatial particle
transition length and asks for the time that is needed to travel over this distance.
1 To simplify notations, functions with ”s” variables correspond to Laplace transforms
throughout the rest of the paper.

--- PAGE 9 ---
8 Benoit Noetinger et al.
This approach is obviously in the spirit of and inherits from the CTRW discussed
in the previous section. Let us elucidate this relation by considering the ADE (5)
discretized in space. Using a ﬁnite diﬀerence or a ﬁnite volume discretization, it
can be written (Delay et al, 2002; Dentz et al, 2012; Russian et al, 2016)
φi
dci(t)
dt =
∑
[ij]
bijcj(t)−
∑
[ij]
bjici(t), (19)
where ci(t) is the concentration at voxel i. The notation ∑
[ij] means summation
over the nearest neighbors of voxel i. The coeﬃcients bij are given in terms of
the ﬂow velocity and dispersion coeﬃcients as (Gjetvaj et al, 2015; Russian et al,
2016)
bij =
ˆDij
ξ2 +|uij|
2ξ
( uij
|uij| + 1
)
, (20)
with the discretization length ξ. For the sake of simplicity we assume that the
discretization is uniform and that all grid cells, or voxels, have the same volumeV
and surface areaS. The velocity componentuij of uj is the ﬂow velocity at voxelj
in direction of voxeli, that isuij = uj·eij, where the vector eij is oriented fromj
toi. Thus,uij > 0 implies that voxeli is downstream from voxelj, and vice versa.
The dispersion coeﬃcient ˆDij measures the dispersive mass ﬂux between voxels
i and j. It is typically given by a suitable average of the dispersion coeﬃcient in
neighboring voxels (Noetinger and Estebenet, 2000; Dentz et al, 2012).
The equivalence with the CTRW approach can be evidenced by following
Dentz et al (2012) and rewriting the generalized Master equation (15) in the dis-
crete space,
dPi(t)
dt =
t∫
0
dt′∑
[ij]
[
Mij(t−t′)Pj(t′)−Mji(t−t′)Pi(t′)
]
, (21)
where we assume that interactions of the modeled process only occur between near-
est neighbors. Furthermore, we setP (xi,t ) =Pi(t) andM(xi−xj,t ; xj) =Mij(t).
We assume now that the transition pdf for length and time can be decoupled into
ψij(t) = wijψj(t) with wij the probability to make a transition from j to i. We
also specify the transition time pdf as an exponential function (Scher and Lax,
1973a)
ψj(t) = exp(−t/τj)/τj. (22)
Thus, Laplace transform of the memory function Mij(t) simpliﬁes to
Mij(s) = wij
τj
. (23)
The generalized Master equation then reads as
dPi(t)
dt =
∑
[ij]
wij
τj
Pj(t)−
∑
[ij]
wji
τi
Pi(t). (24)

--- PAGE 10 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 9
By identifying Pi(t) = φici(t) and bij =wijφj/τj, (19) and (24) become similar.
In this sense, the discretized ADE (19) can be solved through a TDRW, whose
transition probability in space and transition time are given by
wij = bijτj
φj
, τ i = φi∑
[ij]bji
. (25)
2.4 The Continuous Time Random Walk as an Average Transport Approach
The CTRW approach has been used as an upscaling framework to describe aver-
age transport in heterogeneous media (Klafter and Silbey, 1980; Berkowitz et al,
2006). The pioneering works of Scher and Lax (1973a) and Scher and Lax (1973b)
model the transport of charge carries in impure semiconductors with a CTRW
whose PDF of waiting times reﬂects some charge trapping in the potential wells
created by charged impurities. This approach allowed for the explanation and
prediction of observed charge currents, or in other words, arrival time distribu-
tions, that show the heavy tails characterizing anomalous transport. Since then,
the CTRW has been used as an approach to model the history-dependent average
dynamics in diverse types of ﬂuctuating and disordered systems. One can men-
tion: particle transport in media with both heterogeneity at the pore and Darcy
scales (Berkowitz and Scher, 1998, 1997; Hatano and Hatano, 1998; Berkowitz
et al, 2000; Cortis and Berkowitz, 2004; Le Borgne et al, 2008a; de Anna et al,
2013; Kang et al, 2014; Holzner et al, 2015), light dispersion in heterogeneous op-
tical media (Barthelemy et al, 2008), the description of ﬁnancial distributions, the
motion and migrations of animals, and many more (Klafter and Sokolov, 2005).
In the context of average transport or transport upscaling for heterogeneous
media, the CTRW maps the spatial distributions of the ﬂuctuating medium prop-
erties onto the (joint) distribution of transition lengths and durations ψ(a,t ). It is
worth noticing that in general the joint PDF depends on the spatial position, as in
sections 2.2 and 2.3. This spatial dependence is here homogenized by the ensemble
average as outlined in Scher and Lax (1973a) and Scher and Lax (1973b). To illus-
trate this approach, we adopt the method reported in Appendix B of the paper by
Scher and Lax (1973a) dealing with pure diﬀusion in a medium characterized by
spatially distributed particle traps (see also, Bouchaud and Georges, 1990; Dentz
et al, 2016). Our starting point is equation (19) for a medium that is characterized
by constant and isotropic dispersion properties, but a spatially variable porosity
or retardation coeﬃcient φi, which quantiﬁes the strength of the particle trap.
Under these conditions, the coeﬃcients bij in (20) simplify into
b = D
ξ2. (26)
Therefore, the CTRW for this transport system is characterized by the joint tran-
sition pdf
ψij(t) = 1
2dψj(t), ψ j(t) = exp(−t/τj)/τj, τ j =φjτD, (27)

--- PAGE 11 ---
10 Benoit Noetinger et al.
where τD = ξ2/D, and d is the dimension of space. The CTRW equations (12)
now rewrite as
Pi(t) =
t∫
0
dt′Ri(t′)
∞∫
t−t′
dt′′ψi(t′′) (28a)
Ri(t) =P0(t)δ(t) +
∑
[ij]
t∫
0
dt′ 1
2dψj(t−t′)Rj(t′). (28b)
The average transport behavior can be obtained by way of an ensemble averaging
over the disorder, with the meaning here of averaging the distribution ofφi. To this
end, we assume that the φi at diﬀerent sites i and j are uncorrelated. We remind
thatRi(t) represents the probability density that a particle just arrive at site i at
time t. This probability conceals information on all the other sites visited before.
We also remind that the average number of new sites visited for an isotropic lattice
random walk in d > 3 spatial dimensions increases with the number of random
walk steps (Bouchaud and Georges, 1990). This means that Ri(t) and ψi(t) can
be assumed to be statistically independent because it is unlikely that a particle
returns to the same site. Consequently, for d = 3 dimensions we can perform the
ensemble average through the integration of (28) over the distribution pφ(φ) of
point values of φi, which renders
Pi(t) =
t∫
0
dt′Ri(t′)
∞∫
t−t′
dt′′ψ(t′′) (29a)
Ri(t) =P0(t)δ(t) +
∑
[ij]
t∫
0
dt′ 1
2dψ(t−t′)Rj(t′), (29b)
where the pdf of transition times integrates the disorder distributions as
ψ(t) =
∞∫
0
dφpφ(φ)
exp
(
− t
φτD
)
φτD
. (30)
It is noteworthy that such an average transport description holds under the con-
dition that the disorders experienced by the particle at subsequent steps are inde-
pendent.
In this spirit, CTRW has been applied to advective and dispersive transport in
heterogeneous media. For advection-dominated transport, the transition time τ is
related to the advection travel time over a characteristic lengthℓ, of the same order
of magnitude as the correlation distance of the particle velocity along a streamline,
i.e.,
τ = ℓ
v, (31)
where v is the particle velocity. The spatial correlation properties of Lagrangian
particle velocities along streamlines, and the representation of transport by CTRW
have been studied for pore and Darcy scale transport (Le Borgne et al, 2008b,a;

--- PAGE 12 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 11
Kang et al, 2011; de Anna et al, 2013; Kang et al, 2014). The relation between the
spatial distribution of hydraulic conductivity and transition times has been studied
in Edery et al (2014). The CTRW as an average transport approach has been em-
ployed in the interpretation and prediction of diverse anomalous and non-Fickian
behaviors observed in geological media (Berkowitz et al, 2006). In the following, we
brieﬂy summarize the behaviors of breakthrough curves and spatial concentration
moments that are obtained within the CTRW framework for a transition time pdf
that decays algebraically as ψ(t)∝t−1−β with 0 <β < 2.
2.4.1 Breakthrough Curves
Hydrodynamic transport in natural formations is frequently characterized by break-
through curves that here depict the ﬁrst passage time pdfs, or solute ﬂuxes. Both
forms of breakthroughs are quite similar in the case of advection-dominated trans-
port. The ﬁrst passage timet(x1) at a control plane located atx1 can be formulated
in terms of particle trajectories as
t(x1) = inf[t|x(t)≥x1]. (32)
The pdf of ﬁrst passage times can then be written as
f(t,x 1) =⟨δ[t−t(x1)]⟩. (33)
For an instantaneous particle injection into an inﬁnite or semi-inﬁnite domain, it
has been found (Berkowitz et al, 2006) that f(t,x 1) scales as the transition time
pdf,
f(t,x 1)∝t−1−β. (34)
2.4.2 Spatial Concentration Moments
Other observables characterizing the global plume behavior can be found in the
ﬁrst and second centered moments of the solute spatial distribution. The ﬁrstm(1)
i
and second m(2)
ij spatial moments of P (x,t ) are deﬁned as
m(1)
i (t)≡
∫
ddxxiP (x,t ) m(2)
ij (t)≡
∫
ddxxixjP (x,t ). (35)
In terms of the particle trajectories, these moments are given by m(1)
i (t) =⟨xi(t)⟩
and m(2)
ij (t) = ⟨xi(t)xj(t)⟩. The second centered moments are a measure of the
global plume width, and are deﬁned by
κij(t) =m(2)
ij (t)−m(1)
i (t)m(1)
j (t). (36)
With concern to the behavior in time of the spatial moments, we distinguish the
range of β values between 0 and 1 from the range between 1 and 2. For 0 <β < 1
it has been found that (Berkowitz et al, 2006)
m1(t)∝tβ, κ 11(t)∝t2β, κ 22(t)∝tβ. (37)

--- PAGE 13 ---
12 Benoit Noetinger et al.
In the range 1 <β < 2 the moments behave as
m1(t)∝t, κ 11(t)∝t3−β, κ 22(t)∝t. (38)
These behaviors are valid in their asymptotic trend if there exist time regimes for
which the transition time pdf shows the power-law behavior ψ(t)∝t−1−β for 0<
β <2. For β >2 the breakthrough and dispersion behaviors are asymptotically
Fickian. One could also expect that there exists a cut-oﬀ scale, seemingly linked
to the largest velocity scale, beyond which the transition time pdf drops faster
than a power-law. Such situations and the transitions from anomalous to normal
transport behaviors have been investigated in Dentz et al (2004).
3 Numerical Random Walk Particle Tracking Methods
3.1 Classical Random Walks
The simplest random particle tracking algorithm to solve the ADE (5) is obtained
by time discretization of the Langevin equation (9) relying on the Ito convention
of the stochastic integral of dx/dt,
x(t +∆t) = x(t) + u[x(t)]
φ[x(t)]∆t +∇· D[x(t)]
φ[x(t)] ∆t +
√
2D[x(t)]∆t
φ[x(t)] · Z(t), (39)
which yields an Euler scheme of the particle displacement. In the preceding equa-
tion, the time step is supposed to be discretized in increments dt. In the basic
version, time steps are assumed to be constant. The Z(t) are independent ran-
dom vectors of Gaussian components with zero mean, ⟨Z(t)⟩ = 0 and covariance
⟨Zi(t)Zj(t)⟩ = δij. In practice, the random noise Z(t) can be replaced by any
random vector with zero mean and unit variance. In the heterogeneous case, in-
cluding media characterized by discontinuous properties, this classical formulation
of RW has several drawbacks. Intuitively, one can anticipate spurious phenomena
because of the Dirac delta function that appears in the evaluation of the gradient
of discontinuous diﬀusivity. The ﬁrst methods were based on reﬂection principles
approximating the complete solution to the discontinuous interface, which can be
obtained through the so-called method of images (Uﬃnk, 1985; Semra et al, 1993;
Kinzelbach and Uﬃnk, 1991; Kinzelbach, 1988; Zimmermann et al, 2001; Hoteit
et al, 2002a,b; Bechtold et al, 2011). When crossing the interface, random walk-
ers are either reﬂected or transmitted. Starting from the higher dispersion side,
random walkers are more likely reﬂected than dispersed, thus preventing from spu-
rious accumulation of particles in the lower dispersive side. Thorough investigation
of these approximations have been performed both theoretically by deﬁning con-
vergence conditions that should respect the proposed diﬀusive processes (LaBolle
et al, 1998) and numerically by comparing them on diﬀerent benchmarks (Salamon
et al, 2006a; Lejay and Pichot, ????). Numerical studies point out the complexity
of their implementation especially when coupling them with advanced discretiza-
tion scheme for transport. Another drawback is that the basic algorithm leads
to ineﬃcient small spatial displacements in very low diﬀusion coeﬃcient zones.
The particles remain trapped in low diﬀusion zones, increasing the eﬀective com-
putational cost which is proportional to the number of time iterations. In the

--- PAGE 14 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 13
heterogeneous case, including media characterized by discontinuous properties,
this classical formulation of RW has several drawbacks. Intuitively, one can an-
ticipate spurious phenomena because of the Dirac delta function that appears in
the evaluation of the gradient of discontinuous diﬀusivity. In the classical form of
RW, accounting for these diﬀusivity discontinuities requires the implementation
of quite complex ”reﬂection” rules of the particles at the interface between two
media
3.2 Fully coupled advection-dispersion-diﬀusion equation
Introducing advective and dispersive terms in the same equation raises speciﬁc
numerical issues mostly linked to discontinuities in the dispersion gradient and to
the coupling between the ﬁrst-order advective term and the second-order diﬀusive-
dispersive term. Nonetheless, RW methods remain widely used because of their
good numerical properties, irrespective the rate of advection to diﬀusion-dispersion
and also because they are easily implemented. Time domain variants have dras-
tically improved the performances of RW methods, especially when dealing with
heterogeneous media. At the local scale, hydrodynamic dispersion is generally
modeled as a Fickian diﬀusion with the diﬀusion-dispersion coeﬃcient D( x) of
equation (5) expressed as a tensor of components (Bear, 1973):
Dij = (αT|v| +d)δij + (αL−αT )vivj
|v| (40)
whered is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, αL andαT are the longitudinal and transverse
dispersivities, vi is the velocity in direction xi,|v| is the norm of the velocity,
andδij is the Kronecker symbol. Along the principal directions of dispersion, this
expression simpliﬁes into
D =


d +αL|v| 0 0
0 d +αT|v| 0
0 0 d +αT|v|

 (41)
where the ﬁrst coordinate is taken along the direction given by the velocity and
the two other directions are in the plane normal to the velocity.
Both the advective and dispersive terms require the determination of the veloc-
ity v at any location in the modeled domain, while Eulerian methods only require
the knowledge of velocities at the scale of the mesh cell. When the velocity ﬁeld
has been obtained numerically from the discretization of the ﬂow equation over
a calculation grid, the velocity is expressed within each mesh cell by means of
appropriate methods. If the numerical scheme is based on ﬂux conservative Fi-
nite Element methods (e.g., Mixed Finite Element, Mixed Hybrid Finite Element)
(Brezzi and Fortin, 1991; Hoteit et al, 2002a; Mos´ e et al, 1994; Pichot et al, 2010;
Roberts and Thomas, 1991), the velocity is directly derived from a combination
of the ﬁnite element basis functions (Hoteit et al, 2002b). With more standard
Finite Element approaches, conservative velocity schemes can still be derived us-
ing ﬂux-conserving sub-cell subdivisions (Cordes and Kinzelbach, 1992, 1996). For
Finite Diﬀerence and Finite Volume schemes, velocities are most commonly cal-
culated within mesh cells via multi-linear interpolations (linear along the diﬀerent
directions of the meshing) (Pollock, 1988; Maier and B¨ urger, 2013). In fact, only

--- PAGE 15 ---
14 Benoit Noetinger et al.
the linear interpolation scheme is ﬂux-conservative. In the speciﬁc cases handling
regular grids, the linear interpolation scheme can also be derived from the equiva-
lence between Finite Volume methods and Mixed Hybrid Finite Element schemes
(Chavent and Roberts, 1991). While mass-conservative transport schemes require
ﬂux-conservative schemes, they do not impose any condition to the transverse ve-
locity across mesh faces that appear in general to be discontinuous. In association
with the multi-linear interpolation schemes, shear deformation tends to accumulate
at the edges of the mesh cell and is zero outside. This is a strong limitation when
studying solute mixing mechanisms with geometrical and process-based analysis
(Le Borgne et al, 2015). Alternative quadratic velocity interpolation schemes have
been proposed to ensure non-slip boundary conditions at impervious limits (Nunes
et al, 2015). Mass conservation conditions are no longer fulﬁlled locally but they
are globally, over cell facets. This type of interpolation scheme becomes appro-
priate in the presence of numerous no-ﬂow boundary conditions (e.g. modeling
transport at the pore scale).
While classical Eulerian schemes only need the expression of the dispersion
tensor D (Zheng and Bennett, 2002), random walk methods also require the dis-
persion gradient (equation (5)), and thus the velocity gradient. This is an impor-
tant speciﬁcity of RW methods that conditions the choice of both the numerical
schemes and the implementation methods. The main diﬃculty stems from the
discontinuity of the velocity gradient and hence of the dispersion gradient across
cells. We ﬁrst underline that the eﬀect of the discontinuity at the cell facet is not
systematically critical and is sometimes negligible compared with the other eﬀects
of transport. This is the case of heterogeneous permeability ﬁelds as the classical
multi-Gaussian lognormal ﬁelds for which the transition between high and low
ﬂow zones remains gradual enough (Salamon et al, 2006b). While not fully tested,
this point was hinted in previous studies (Tompson and Gelhar, 1990). In these
conditions of heterogeneity, random walkers are much more dispersed by the ve-
locity ﬁeld and its gradient within the mesh cells than by discontinuities at the
cell interfaces.
TDRW methods are in essence more appealing than RW because their random
walkers stop at the interface before being transferred to neighboring cells (Bodin
et al, 2007; Delay and Bodin, 2001). The travel time to the interface is drawn from
exact or approximate analytical solutions to transport in homogeneous media. De-
veloped ﬁrst in one-dimensional media for simulating solute transport in fracture
segments (Bodin et al, 2003; Painter and Cvetkovic, 2005), TDRW have been ex-
tended to multidimensional media (Bodin, 2015; Delay et al, 2002). When local
analytical solutions of the travel time distribution can be obtained, TDRW meth-
ods are highly eﬃcient to couple the advective and diﬀusive/dispersive transport
processes. In the absence of local analytical solutions, alternative methods have
been developed as a mix between ”space-domain” random walk (classical random
walk) and time-domain random walk and trying to combine both the spatial and
temporal advantages. The constant displacement scheme consists in choosing a
spatial scale ∆x much smaller than the mesh scale l and deriving the time step
∆t from the spatial scale divided the local velocity v (Beaudoin et al, 2007; Wen
and Gomez-Hernandez, 1996; de Dreuzy et al, 2007): ∆t = ∆x/v. The classical
space-domain random walk method is then run once for this time step ∆t using
both advection and dispersion mechanisms. The control by the velocity at the lo-
cation of the random walker ensures that the mean displacement remains always

--- PAGE 16 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 15
equal to ∆x. The characteristic number of steps taken within the mesh cell n can
be obviously ﬁxed by choosing ∆x = l/n. The varying time step ∆t according
to the location in the domain maintains an even balance between accuracy and
eﬃciency over the whole modeled domain. This method combines part of the eﬃ-
ciency of the TDRW method by ﬁxing the mean displacement and the generality of
the classical Space-Domain RW. It also fundamentally respects the ﬂow structure
within the mesh cell because the small displacements correctly follow the structure
of ﬂow lines in each cell. In classical implementations, dispersion discontinuities
treated by the reﬂection method is again an issue. It could be solved by switching
to TDRW when the random walker comes close enough to one of the cell facets.
Close to cell corners, only the interface in the direction of the velocity could be
considered.
3.3 Purely diﬀusive issues
In the case of purely diﬀusive issues as for Darcian ﬂuid ﬂow, we setu(x) = 0 in the
ADE and rewrite the equation for the ﬂuid pressure p (that replaces the notation
c for this section) as:
φ(x)∂p(x,t )
∂t =∇· [D(x)∇p(x,t )] +S(x,t ). (42)
In the hydrogeology practice, or in the oil and gas industry, D(x) is the diﬀusivity
given by D(x) = k(x)
µct
, k is the permeability, µ is the ﬂuid viscosity and ct the
total compressibility of the medium (rock plus ﬂuid). A source term in the form
S(x,t ) representing either sources and sinks, or boundaries has been added in the
right hand side of the equation. Note that the equation can describe either tracer,
thermal or pressure diﬀusion in a porous medium of weak compressibility. The
linearity of this equation allows us to consider the cases where S(x,t ) is in the
form δ(t)δ(x− x0). This means that we are interested in the Green’s function
of the previous equation. To go farther, a ﬁrst step is to represent properly the
heterogeneous (or fractured) medium by means of a geometrical meshing. In a
second step, using an appropriate numerical scheme results in a discrete set of
equations to be solved. Finally, RW methods are used to solve the equations and
to glance at some information concealed in these equations.
3.3.1 Discretization of heterogeneous and fractured media
A discretization of the medium can be obtained via any available mesh builder
handling triangular or quadrangular elements (or the corresponding elements in the
three-dimensional case). In the case of bulk heterogeneities such as those mimicked
by geostatistical random ﬁelds, any suﬃciently reﬁned meshing compared with the
underlying correlation length will capture most of the heterogeneities (Fig. 1).
In the case of sharp heterogeneities enclosing discontinuities such as between
diﬀerent layers, it is assumed that the meshing follows the discontinuities. For
densely fractured media, building conform meshes (i.e., meshes not too much dis-
torted) closely following the discrete network of fractures becomes almost infeasible
(Fig. 2).

--- PAGE 17 ---
16 Benoit Noetinger et al.
Fig. 1 An heterogeneous medium and the associated mesh
Fig. 2 A fractured unit cell and its triangulation
Fig. 3 Local zoom of the mesh

--- PAGE 18 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 17
In a second step, the diﬀusion equation (42) can be discretized using Finite
Volume or Finite Element methods, yielding usually a linear diﬀerential set of
equations in the form of:
Viφi
∂pi(t)
∂t = ∑
j neighbor i
Tij(pj(t)−pi(t))
+
∫
grid block iS(x,t )dx.
(43)
Here,Vi denotes the volume of the i-th grid block. This step can result in additional
geometrical constraints for the meshing that are beyond the scope of this study.
Considering for illustration a Cartesian regular grid of spatial step ∆x, using a
Finite Volume approach, the discretized version of this equation in d dimensions
for each grid block of size (∆x)d can be written as:
(∆x)dφi
∂pi(t)
∂t = ∑
j neighbor i
Tij(pj(t)−pi(t))
+
∫
grid block iS(x,t )dx.
(44)
The summation is carried out with respect to indexj labeling the nearest neighbors
of the current grid block i.
It remains to deﬁne the so called transmissivities or inter block conductivi-
ties Tij between two adjacent grid cells i and j with respect to the underlying
heterogeneous map. A classical choice is the harmonic mean given by:
Tij = 2DiDj(∆x)(d−2)
(Di +Dj) (45)
where subscript i indicates that the values are evaluated at the center xi of
the i-th grid block. This provides a consistent discretization of (43) (McCarthy,
1990, 1991, 1993a,b). In the speciﬁc case of a fractured porous medium, mixing
hydraulic properties of fractures and matrix, a diﬀerent option is usually taken by
assigning diﬀusion coeﬃcient to meshes i in the form:
Di =
{
(∆x)(d−2)Dm, if xi∈Ωm,
(∆x)(d−2)Df, if xi∈Ωf.
}
(46)
Here,Ωf andΩm represent the fracture and the matrix domains, respectively.
Using a suﬃciently reﬁned grid, allows relying upon standard Euler time discretiza-
tion and associated solvers to produce accurate solutions of the discretized version
of (43).
It is noteworthy that many discretization methods yield linear systems in the
form of (43). Combining various mesh generators with compatible discretization
schemes for the diﬀusion operator will always render the same general form of the
discretized equations, the latter simply changing by the stencil of neighbor cells
involved in each equation and the formulas of inter-block transmissivities (45). A
rather complete analysis of this last issue can be found in Romeu and Noetinger
(1995). It was observed that convergence to the solution of the continuous equa-
tions can be greatly accelerated according to the meshing and discrete scheme
used. More recently, Wang et al (2014) and Qu et al (2014) detailed the local
ﬂow ﬁeld close to adjacent corners of neighbor grid cells. These authors were able
to justify the general power law averaging as the rule for generating inter-block

--- PAGE 19 ---
18 Benoit Noetinger et al.
coeﬃcients by using the so called ”ﬁnite analytic approach”. It must be kept in
mind that that with extreme contrasts of diﬀusion properties between cells, the
standard choice of harmonic means (45) results in severe underestimations of the
large scale diﬀusion, the harmonic mean being mainly controlled by the smallest
value. In the case of percolation lattices involving highly contrasted properties, the
percolation threshold might be artiﬁcially shifted. In the sequel, we will no longer
come back to the choice of inter-block parameters even though it is an important
feature for solving ﬂow and transport equations.
3.4 Random walk methods for dual-porosity models
Fractured media are generally made of highly conductive fractures present at sev-
eral scales and embedded in a low permeability matrix. This high contrast of
properties led to the introduction of dual-porosity models where matrix and frac-
tures are treated separately and coupled through an exchange term. These models
have been used to simulate various processes, such as ﬂuid ﬂow (Barenblatt and
Zheltov, 1960; Warren and Root, 1963), solute transport (Dershowitz and Miller,
1995; Cvetkovic et al, 2004), and electric current ﬂow (Roubinet and Irving, 2014).
They can also be associated with Dual-porosity models can also rely upon Discrete
Fracture Networks (DFN) approaches to consider the geometrical complexity of
realistic fracture networks (Cacas et al, 1990; Delorme et al, 2013a). In the purely
diﬀusive case, these dual-porosity models can be ruled by the following equation:
∫ ∞
0
dτ[φfVfδ(t−τ)+φmVmf(t−τ)]∂p(x,τ )
∂τ =∇· [D(x)∇p(x,t )]+S(x,t ). (47)
Here, Vf and Vm denote the volume fractions of the fractures and the matrix,
respectively, andφf and φm are the associated porosity.
The Laplace transform of eq (47) yields:
[φfVf +φmVmf(s)][sp (x,s )−p(x,t = 0)] =∇· [D(x)∇p(x,s )] +S(x,s ). (48)
In some dual-porosity models, RW methods have been used for: (i) up-scaling the
transfer properties required to describe averaged fracture-matrix interactions, (ii)
directly solving the considered ﬂow or/and transport problem, and (iii) evaluating
ﬂow or/and transport eﬀective properties. In this section, we describe a few of
these applications distinguishing the dual-porosity models based on a continuous
representation of the fractures (section 3.4.1) from models based on an explicit
representation of the DFN (section 3.4.2).
3.4.1 Up-scaling DFN to continuum dual-porosity models
Solving ﬂuid ﬂow in fractured porous media can be carried out by resorting to a
continuous dual-porosity model, such as the one described in Appendix B. The
model description handled in the present study lets appear transfer functions and
coeﬃcients between fracture and matrix continua, denotedf(t) andλ, respectively.
Although these functions and coeﬃcients can be determined analytically for simple
cases (expressions (70)-(71)), a numerical evaluation is required for the complex
cases. In this context, Noetinger and Estebenet (2000), Noetinger et al (2001a,b)

--- PAGE 20 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 19
and Landereau et al (2001) applied directly a TDRW method (named CTRW
in their papers) to determine these transfer parameters. The key observation of
Noetinger and Estebenet (2000) and Noetinger et al (2001a) is that f(t) can be
interpreted as the probability density function (pdf) of the ﬁrst exit time of a
particle initially launched from a random location in the matrix, then undergoing
a random motion in the matrix and ﬁnally exiting toward the fracture domain
at the matrix boundary. This function f(t) might also be identiﬁed as the local
memory introduced for general processes hosting mobile-immobile physical and
chemical interactions (Carrera et al, 1998; Willmann et al, 2008). It can be veriﬁed
explicitely on the few analytical solutions of f(s) (Appendix B) that the transfer
function can be developed as a power serie of s (Noetinger and Estebenet, 2000;
Noetinger et al, 2001a):
f(s) = 1− φmVm
λ s +.... (49)
Recasting the equation in the real domain yields ⟨t⟩ =
∫ +∞
0 tf(t)dt = φmVm
λ .
Therefore, the mean residence time of random walkers in the matrix is directly
related to the transfer coeﬃcient introduced in dual-porosity models. It can be
shown mathematically that the λ coeﬃcient arising from this deﬁnition exactly
coincides with the coeﬃcient obtained from large scale averaging or homogeniza-
tion theory (Noetinger et al, 2001b). These considerations result in the following
algorithm that provides a full determination of the exchange function f(t) as well
as the parameter λ. Without loss of generality, we assume φm = 1. It is assumed
that the matrix was meshed and that a ﬁnite volume scheme led to a discretized
set of equations having the form of 43. We introduce the notations: Bi =∑
[ij]Tij
and wij = Tij
Bi
The following algorithm can be easily implemented:
1. Choose the number N of independent particles.
2. To start the i-th particle, choose one matrix node ji with a probability pro-
portional to the volume of the associated grid block, k=1.
3. While the particle has not left the matrix, at step k of the algorithm, move the
particle from site “i” to its nearest neighbor site “j”, with a probability equal
to wij
4. Update the time counter with the relation:
tk =tk−1− Vi
Bi
Log(rand).
Here, rand stands for a random number picked from a uniform distribution
over [0, 1].
5. If at iteration k the particle enters a grid block belonging to the fracture region
at iteration k, store the exit time ti = tk of the current particle i and launch
the i+1 th particle.
6. Store the N independent exit times t(1),..., t(N ).
7. End.
It is then easy to obtain the histogram of the distribution yielding f(t). The
quantityλ can be estimated by means of the relation
λ = Vm
⟨tmf⟩≃ Vm
1
N
∑N
i=1t(i).

--- PAGE 21 ---
20 Benoit Noetinger et al.
The above algorithm, which returns a direct determination of the complete ex-
change function, is very fast and eﬃcient because there is no need of iterations
(particle motions) in the fractures. It was successfully tested on simple geometries
consisting of for stratiﬁed media, or spherical matrix blocks and provided good
comparison with the corresponding analytical determinations of both f(t) and λ
(Noetinger and Estebenet, 2000; Noetinger et al, 2001b,a). In addition in these
papers, it was shown that this exchange functionf(t) is closely related to the time
autocorrelation function of If(t). Here, the fracture indicator function is deﬁned
as If(t) = 1 if the particle in the fracture at time t, 0 else. This corresponds to
the curve labelled by FMF in (Fig. 4).
Several tests on simple DFN’s with some randomness in the fracture character-
istics were also carried out (Fig. 4). The residence time distribution f(t) obtained
by TDRW compared very well with the corresponding ﬁnite volume solutions.
These solutions were obtained by solving the relaxation problem given in the ap-
pendix 67 that is closely related to determination of the ﬁsrt exit time distribution
f(t).
Fig. 4 Left: a fractured medium. Right: transfer function computed by TDRW and by ﬁnite
diﬀerences.
It remains to characterize transfer functions for complex DFN. Finding generic
analytical forms generalizing the known analytical forms given in appendix B
(69,70, 71) and able to account for very wide distributions of matrix block size
remains to be done. At short times, corresponding to large Laplace parameter s,
the function f(t) is sensitive to the ratio of the fracture surface to total volume.
At larger times, f(t) samples the whole block size distribution, making that some
fractal and thus ”anomalous” power law behavior may be anticipated. This could
lead in the real time domain to anomalous transfer kernels equivalent to fractional
derivatives (N´ eel et al, 2011, 2014). There is no doubt that the TDRW method
depicted above would be useful to feed the investigations with numerical results.
As an illustration the method was implemented to estimate some properties of
fractured medium constructed with percolation lattices. Fig. 5 shows a realization
of a percolation lattice with a proportion p = 0.57 of active fractures. In Fig. 6, we
plotted the dependence on p−pc of the mean residence time in the matrix (with
diﬀusivity equal to one) with respect to the proportion of active fractures. The
ﬂexibility of the TDRW approach allows to compute several mean residence times
of interest, that depend on the fracture sub-network that is retained to decide to
stop the particle’s motion in the algorithm above (the reader can remark that any

--- PAGE 22 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 21
150 x 150, p = 0.57
Fig. 5 A bond percolation network at proportion p = 0.57 of active fractures, red = isolated
clusters, black = backbone, green= dead-ends
arbitrary stopping criterion can be imposed in the algorithm above). This freedom
was used to study the residence time distribution computed once retaining the
whole fracture network (the basic algorithm), or only the connected cluster, or
only the resulting backbone, neglecting dead ends. In order to account for ﬁnite
clusters, particles attaining an isolated cluster, are instantaneously released at
a random location in a matrix mesh bounding this cluster (so called ”speed on
isolated clusters”) and may continue their diﬀusive motion before attaining the
sub-network of interest at which the exit time ti is stored. Then average residence
times can be evaluated depending on the proportion p of active fractures.
A set diﬀerent curves corresponding to diﬀerent mean residence times ⟨t⟩ is
obtained. Each curve depends on the fracture subnetwork that was kept, i.e., all the
fractures including non-relevant isolated clusters (red dots), or only the percolation
backbone (black triangles) corresponding to the extreme cases. Intermediate curves
correspond to diﬀerent treatments of the remaining ﬁnite clusters. Notably, keeping
the whole set of fractures (red dots) in Fig. 6 does not lead to any critical divergence
of the mean residence time close to pc (pc = 0.5 in the case of a 2D bond square
lattice). Further studies should be carried out to obtain a better characterization
of the associated critical exponents. This result illustrates that even starting from
the same DFN, exchange coeﬃcients may be process dependent, depending on the
role of ﬁnite clusters or dead-ends in the transport process under consideration.
It can be mentioned that random walk methods have also been used in contin-
uous dual-porosity models to directly model transport in fractured porous media
(Liu et al, 2000; Pan and Bodvarsson, 2002). In these studies, advection-dispersion

--- PAGE 23 ---
22 Benoit Noetinger et al.
10
−1
10
0
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
p−pc
MEAN TIME
stop on every fracture
stop on infinite path
speed on isolated cluster
stop on backbone
speed on isolated cluster
stop on infinite path
no isolated cluster
stop on backbone
no isolated cluster
−0.12584
−1.7846
−2.5792
−3.6168
−3.4314
Fig. 6 Exchange coeﬃcient computed for the percolation network as a function of p−pc
. The indicated numbers correspond to the estimated slopes of the apparent scaling laws in
this Log Log representation.
equations were considered in both the fracture and matrix continua, and the prob-
ability of transfer between these two continua was deﬁned analytically.
3.4.2 Random walk simulations on discrete fracture networks accounting for the
matrix
In the preceding section, it was shown that the transfer function f(t) could be
determined eﬃciently using TDRW. Once f(t) is found applications can be envi-
sioned by using the continuous double porosity equations (60) or the alternative
form (63). Another option is to keep the details of the DFN topology explicitly,
without keeping an expensive explicit meshing of the fractures. In two dimensions,
the DFN is represented by means of a resistor/capacitor network with pressure
unknowns located only at the intersections of the fractures. This class of models
are called pipe network models. Chang and Yortsos (1990) and Acuna and Yort-
sos (1995) carried out simulations of pressure transient (well tests) in this way
using two-dimensional DFN close to the percolation threshold. The components
of ﬂow between matrix and fractures were neglected, corresponding to studying
an impervious matrix. A three-dimensional generalization of this pipe network ap-
proach including these components was proposed by Noetinger and Jarrige (2012)
and Noetinger (2015). The main diﬃculty is that in 3 d, intersections between
fractures are segments, so describing pressure proﬁles at these intersections in-
volves many degrees of freedom. By introducing the set of fracture intersections

--- PAGE 24 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 23
labeled by j, and denoting pj as the average pressure on the j-th intersection, it is
possible to derive the following set of equations that corresponds to a lowest order
approximation:
∀i = 1,N∩,
∑
j∈J(i)
K 11
ij (Vf +Vmf(s))[spj(s)−pj(t = 0)] =
∑
j∈J(i)
VfT 11
ij pj(s).(50)
To simplify notations, both matrix and fracture porosity are here equal to unity.
The quantities K 11
ij and T 11
ij depend explicitly on the shape of the fractures and
can be determined with fast algorithms (Khvoenkova and Delorme, 2011; Delorme
et al, 2013b). One can note that the number of unknowns corresponds to the num-
ber of intersections between fractures, so the method allows treating large DFN’s.
If a better accuracy is needed, one can increase the order of the approximation, but
the number of unknown remains still Noetinger and Jarrige (2012) and Noetinger
(2015). The set of equations 50 has the same form that a discrete form of the set
of equations (63) that can be solved using TDRW with trapping as introduced
by Dentz et al (2012), equations (26), (29), (30) and (31) of their contribution.
Identiﬁcation is obtained by stating
(Vf +Vmf(s)) = 1
µ(x,s ) (51)
where µ(x,s ) is the local memory function introduced in Dentz et al (2012). To
summarize, one can state that TDRW is useful to both:
– determine f(t) using random walkers in the matrix only, the DFN acting as a
boundary
– once f(t) properly known, solving equations (50) to up-scale the DFN in or-
der to parameterize a continuous double porosity model useful for engineering
applications.
TDRW methods associated with an explicit representation of the DFN have
also been used to model transport processes in fractured media Geiger et al (2010).
Some models only consider advective displacement in the fractures with the aim
of studying hydrodynamic dispersion in two-dimensional heterogeneous percola-
tion networks (Rivard and Delay, 2004). In these studies, binary and log-normally
distributed hydraulic conductivity ﬁelds are considered, and the impact of this
heterogeneity on the longitudinal dispersion coeﬃcient is analyzed at the perco-
lation threshold. In other models, advection-diﬀusion mechanisms in the fractures
and pure diﬀusion in the matrix are considered, with sometimes a mesh-free rep-
resentation of the matrix. This dual-porosity formulation reduces the numerical
cost and the algorithm complexity related to the meshing step of each simulation.
With these techniques, particles only move in the fractures and their diﬀusion into
the surrounding matrix is considered via an additional retardation time (Cvetkovic
et al, 2004; Dershowitz and Miller, 1995; Roubinet et al, 2010). When derived from
analytical solutions, this retardation time relies on specﬁc physical and geometrical
assumptions. For example, Dershowitz and Miller (1995) consider a pure-diﬀusion
equation in matrix blocks of regular shape. In Cvetkovic et al (2004), retention
models based on analytical solutions of fracture-matrix systems (e.g., Tang et al
(1981)) are employed under the assumption that the matrix surrounding each frac-
ture is inﬁnite yielding no limitation of matrix diﬀusion by nearby fractures. To

--- PAGE 25 ---
24 Benoit Noetinger et al.
overcome this restrictive assumption, Roubinet et al (2010) add the possibility for
each particle to transfer from one fracture to another by diﬀusion through the
matrix blocks. The method is applicable to heterogeneous fractured porous media
without constraint on the matrix block geometry or network density.
The numerical methods previously described have been used to evaluate up-
scaled transport properties and to analyze the impact of structural heterogeneity
at the large-scale on the behavior of transport in fractured media. In Cvetkovic
et al (2004), Painter and Cvetkovic (2005), and Painter et al (2008), up-scaled
transport properties are ﬁrst evaluated over small discrete fracture networks, and
then used to perform large-scale simulations. This eﬃcient two-step method has
been applied to the ¨Asp¨ o Hard Rock Laboratory in Sweden (Cvetkovic et al, 2004;
Painter and Cvetkovic, 2005) and has been extended by introducing ﬁrst-order
(kinetics) solute transformations (Painter et al, 2008). Other RW methods associ-
ated with a DFN representation have helped to understand the impact of the DFN
heterogeneity on large-scale eﬀective transport properties. More precisely, Liu et al
(2007) aimed their study at the dependence with the space scale of the eﬀective
matrix diﬀusion coeﬃcient deduced from ﬁeld tracer experiments. This scale eﬀect
has been observed in numerous characterization studies of fractured rocks, and the
numerical simulations conducted in Liu et al (2007) showed that this eﬀect was
related to the DFN heterogeneity. The impact of DFN heterogeneity has also been
studied in Roubinet et al (2013) by way of numerical transport simulations con-
ducted over synthetic fracture networks with large ranges of hydraulic properties
and wide distributions of matrix block size.
3.5 Measuring Mixing Properties From Random Walk Simulations
Mixing is one of the key mechanisms of interest when studying transport and re-
action phenomena in heterogeneous porous and fractured media (Kitanidis, 1994;
Dentz et al, 2011). While dispersion measures the spatial extent of conveyed
plumes, mixing quantiﬁes the distribution of concentration of dissolved chemi-
cal species in the ﬂuid phase (Le Borgne et al, 2015). Therefore, mixing measures
both the dilution of plume in the resident ﬂuid and the probability of dissolved re-
active species to meet and react (de Simoni et al, 2005). Diﬀerent mixing measures
have been proposed including the dilution index (Kitanidis, 1994), the intensity of
segregation (Danckwerts, 1952) and the scalar dissipation rate (Ottino, 1989). The
latter measures the rate at which concentration gradients are dissipated under the
combined action of advection and diﬀusion. It can be directly translated into an
eﬀective reaction rate when fast reactions are considered (Le Borgne et al, 2010;
de Simoni et al, 2005).
Numerical particle tracking methods are particularly useful to investigate dis-
persion and mixing as they avoid numerical dispersion. Nevertheless, handling a
ﬁnite set of particles is typically faced with signiﬁcant noise and imprecisions in
the calculation of concentration gradients, whose reduction requires a large density
of particles. This is an issue when estimating scalar dissipation rates that depend
on the concentration gradients according to
χ(t) =
∫
dxD [∇c]2, (52)

--- PAGE 26 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 25
whereD is the local diﬀusion coeﬃcient andc is the local concentration. This local
value ofD [∇c]2 is also useful as the interpretation of the sensistivity of large scale
parameters to local heterogeneities (Noetinger, 2013). This measures of mixing is
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by errors in concentration gradients since the latter appear
squared in the measure. However, for ﬁnite time injection conditions, i.e. when no
additional solute is injected in the domain when scalar dissipation is measured, it
can be shown that the scalar dissipation rate is directly linked to the derivative
with respect to time of the squared concentration as,
χ(t) =−1
2
d
dt
∫
dxc 2. (53)
The expression shows that the scalar dissipation rate is a measure of the decay of
concentration variance as the transported plume is diluted in the resident ﬂuid.
As illustrated in Fig. 7 and discussed in Le Borgne et al (2010), it comes out that
expression (53) is far less sensitive to numerical noise than the classical expression
of the scalar dissipation rate (equation (52)) because it does not require evaluating
concentration gradients. With measure based on (53), mixing can be evaluated
eﬃciently from random walk particle tracking simulation in heterogeneous media
(Le Borgne et al, 2010). As illustrated in Fig. 7d, heterogeneity in permeability is
found to induce temporal scaling eﬀects of the mixing rates that distinguish from
those expected for homogeneous media. This phenomenon can be explained by
an enhancement of diﬀusion due to the stretching of the solute plume by velocity
gradients (Le Borgne et al, 2013).
4 Application from pore to ﬁeld scale
4.1 Eﬀective ﬂow and transport parameters
A direct application of RW methods for diﬀusion problem is the determination
of eﬀective conductivity (or diﬀusivity) of heterogeneous media, by means of the
Einstein relation bridging the mean square displacement to the eﬀective diﬀusion
coeﬃcient of the handled equation (Einstein, 1956):
R2(t) =⟨(x(t)−x(t = 0))2⟩ = 2dD(t)t, (54)
whered is the dimensionality of the system andD(t) denotes the scaling coeﬃcient
of the diﬀusion equation under consideration (diﬀusion, diﬀusivity or conductiv-
ity). In the case of bulk heterogeneous media, it is possible to show that the
convergence of D(t) to its asymptotic value Deff is reached once R2(t)≫ lc,
where lc is the permeability correlation length (Noetinger and Gautier, 1998).
Physical considerations show that at short times, R2(t)∼ ¯Dt where ¯D denotes
the average diﬀusivity, because the diﬀusive particles sample local homogeneous
regions of size lc. The cross-over between both regimes can provide information
on the REV size. This technique has also been often used to analyze binary me-
dia, for instance that obtained from X-ray tomographic imaging (e.g. Gouze and
Luquot (2011)). The eﬀective diﬀusion and tortuosity can be obtained from the
asymptotic regime but but the surface to volume ratio is also obtained from the
transient regime (Sen et al, 1994; Sen, 2003, 2004). RW calculations inferring the

--- PAGE 27 ---
26 Benoit Noetinger et al.
a) Numerical simulation of plume advection and diﬀusion 
 with RW particle tracking in homgeneous media 
b) Temporal evolution of the scalar dissipation rate in homogeneous media 
(a) t/τ =0.8a (b) t/τ =2.6 a (c) t/ τ =8.2 a
 y/λ
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
 y/λ y/ λ
0 10 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 40 50 
 x/λ x/λ x/ λ
-3.5 
-4 
-4.5 
-5 
-5.5 
-6 
-4 
-4.5 
-5 
-5.5 
-6 
-4.2 
-4.6 
--5 
-5.4 
-5.8 
c) Numerical simulation of plume advection and diﬀusion 
 with RW particle tracking in heterogeneous media 
d) Temporal evolution of the scalar dissipation rate in heterogeneous media 
a
10
-1 
10
0
10
1
10
2
10 
3
10
-7 
10
-6 
10
-5 
10
-4 
10
-3 
10
-2 
10
-1 
10
0
10
1
10
2
χ(t) / χ1D (τa)
t / τa
σ
2
=0.01
σ
2
lnK=1
σ
2
=9lnK
lnK
10 
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
-6 
10
-5 
10
-4 
10
-3 
10
-2 
10
-1 
10 
0
χ(t)/ χ1D(τD)
t / τD
 analytical solution
 Estimation from local gradients
 Estimation from temporal derivative of M(t) 
Fig. 7 a. Numerical simulation of the transport of a line of tracer in a homogeneous media
under advection and diﬀusion with particle tracking. τD is the characteristic diﬀusion time
over a pixel of size ∆x,τD =∆2
x/D b. Estimation of the scalar dissipation rate from the local
concentration gradients (52) and from the local concentration squared M(t) =
∫
dxc2 (53).
The latter compared much better than the former to the analytical solution for a homoge-
neous media χ1D(t) = C2
0Lyt−3/2
8
√
2πD . c. Numerical simulation of the transport of a line of tracer
in a heterogeneous media under advection and diﬀusion with particle tracking. d. Temporal
evolution of scalar dissipation rates estimated for diﬀerent permeability ﬁeld variances. Het-
erogeneity in permeability aﬀects the temporal scaling of the scalar dissipation rate and thus
the global mixing rate. Adapted from Le Borgne et al (2010).
eﬀective properties at the sample scale of binary images of porous media can be
eﬃciently performed using a TDRW approach. The regular lattice over which par-
ticles are moved by jumps of prescribed sizes is mapped onto the image voxels.
Calculation ofDeff from binarized media can be performed by solving a boundary
value problem mimicking a diﬀusion experiment where the particles are initially
located at one boundary of the medium and the ﬁrst passage time monitored at
the opposite boundary. A more eﬃcient method is to distribute randomly the par-
ticle in the pore space (initial value problem) and apply directly (54) to measure
the evolution of D(t) in time t and obtain Deff from the asymptotic behavior
of D(t). Practically, it may become diﬃcult to observe the asymptotic behavior
of D(t) because the sample does not enclose heterogeneity of ﬁnite scale and/or
because calculations were stopped too early. For example, particles might spend a
huge time to reach tiny connected paths in binary media close to the percolation
threshold, making that anomalous diﬀusion occurs (Sahimi, 2011; Redner, 1989).
RW methods have also been employed to calculate the eﬀective dispersion of
binarized porous media by solving (5) in which a steady-state velocity ﬁeld is
obtained solving the Navier-Stokes equations using a classical Finite Volume ap-
proach. This approach was initiated by Salles et al (1993). The geometry of the
simulations as well as the boundary and initial conditions are generally chosen to

--- PAGE 28 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 27
mimic laboratory tracer tests experiments through core samples. The settings are
usually of ”permeameter” type with a passive tracer injected at one side of the core
and the tracer breakthrough curve (BTC) monitored at the opposite side. A pulse
injection is usually mimicked in the numerical simulation instead of continuous
injections of actual experiments because the pulse fasten computations (less par-
ticles in the system). In general, the size of the domain is limited by the computa-
tional eﬀort needed to solve the Navier-Stokes equations; the current pattern being
three dimensional lattices of 300 3 to 1000 3 nodes that correspond to millimeter-
sized rock samples. Nevertheless, this approach relying upon TDRW calculations
remains appealing regarding the studies on the relationships between ﬂow ﬁeld
properties and solute dispersion evidenced by markedly non-Fickian breakthrough
curves. Bijeljic et al (2013a,b) studied the dispersion in carbonate and sandstone
rock samples using binarized images of X-ray tomography. They simulated trans-
port in moving particles by advection along streamlines (previously computed
from the ﬂow ﬁeld) and using a classical RW with jumps of constant time step
to simulate molecular diﬀusion. The authors characterized the heterogeneity of
the porous medium as the distribution of pore throat size and showed that an
asymptotic diﬀusion was reached after the particles had visited many throats.
Conversely, Gjetvaj et al (2015) investigated the origin of non-Fickian transport
using the Berea sandstone containing a small fraction of micro-porous cement with
pore size below the resolution of X-ray micro-tomography (Fig. 8). The authors
showed that the micro-porous phase was fairly well depicted as an immobile dif-
fusive domain while the solute transport in the macro-porosity taken as a mobile
domain was solved as a combination of Navier-Stokes and diﬀusion equations. So-
lute motion in the modeled sample was simulated by TDRW and showed that
breakthrough curves exhibited non-Fickian diﬀusion processes stemming from the
heterogeneity of the ﬂow ﬁeld and the diﬀusion into the micro-porosity. Finally,
the authors proposed an up-scaled one-dimensional model calculating transition
times of particles conditioned by (time)truncated power law distributions repre-
senting the eﬀects of both the ﬂow ﬁeld heterogeneity and trapping plus diﬀusion
mechanisms in the micro-porosity.
McCarthy (1990, 1991, 1993a,b) was the ﬁrst author carrying out TDRW cal-
culations for the purpose of up-scaling hydraulic-conductivities. Latter, random
walk methods were also used to up-scale the transport properties of heterogeneous
porous media at diverse scales. For example, at the large scale, heterogeneity of
permeability has been represented by a lognormal exponentially correlated distri-
bution and the ﬂow equation was discretized and solved with a Finite Diﬀerence
scheme (de Dreuzy et al, 2007; Beaudoin et al, 2010; Beaudoin and de Dreuzy,
2013). Then, the eﬀective longitudinal and transversal dispersions were inferred
by way of two-dimensional (Beaudoin et al, 2010; de Dreuzy et al, 2007) and
three-dimensional (Beaudoin and de Dreuzy, 2013) TDRW calculations. An addi-
tional advantage of TDRW methods for advective-dispersive transport in fractured
networks is their capability to separate the transport within the fractures from
mechanisms at fracture intersections. Diﬀerent assumptions can be applied at the
fracture intersections from complete mixing to streamline routing (Berkowitz et al,
1994; Kosakowski and Berkowitz, 1999; Park et al, 2003), resulting in markedly
diﬀerent solute mixing behaviors at the network scale (Bruderer and Bernab´ e,
2001; de Dreuzy et al, 2001; Park et al, 2001).

--- PAGE 29 ---
28 Benoit Noetinger et al.
10
−1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
410
−8
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
time [s]
Np/Np0
Pe=102
Pe=1
Pe=10
Fig. 8 Left: three-dimensional visualization of the pore network (blue) and the connected
microporosity (yellow) for a sub-volume of 120 3 voxels of the (0.8 mm3) Berea sandstone
sample studied by Gjetvaj et al (2015). Right: BTCs for pore-scale mobile-immobile transport
through the Berea sample for diﬀerent values of the Peclet number computed by TDRW.
4.2 Interpretation of solute transport experiments
At the laboratory scale, CTRW has been used to interpret transport experiments
set up as either saturated and unsaturated ﬂow cells conveying sorbing and non-
sorbing solutes (Hatano and Hatano, 1998; Berkowitz et al, 2000; Bromly and Hinz,
2004; Cortis and Berkowitz, 2004), or a single fracture in granitic core samples
percolated with non-sorbing tracers (Jimenez-Hornero et al, 2005).
Random Walk approaches have also been used to interpret non-Fickian diﬀu-
sion evidenced by in-situ ﬁeld tracer test experiments. One of the most common
evidence of non-Fickian transport processes is the ﬂat tailing of breakthrough
curves at long travel times that marks slow release of weak solute concentrations
(Fig. 9) (Haggerty et al, 2000; Berkowitz et al, 2006). This tailing behavior holds
information about the underlying processes triggering non-Fickian transport.
For example, matrix diﬀusion is known to impart strong tailings. As explained
in section 2, this problem can be modeled in adding to the Fickian ADE a sink-
source term accounting for mass transfers between the mobile domain and the
matrix (immobile domain) where diﬀusion dominates:
φ(x)∂c(x,t )
∂t −∇· [D∇c(x,t ) + vc(x,t )] +S(x,t ) = 0 (55)
with
S(x,t ) =φ′(x)∂
∂t
∫
dt′M(x,t−t′)c(x,t′), (56)
whereφ andφ′ denote the porosity in the mobile and immobile domain respectively
andM is the (eventually spatially distributed) memory function that contains all
the information on the geometry, the volume fraction of the immobile domain, and
its accessibility to tracer particles conveyed in the mobile domain.
Various formulation of this sink-source term S(x,t ) were given to model the
multi-rate nature of mobile-immobile mass exchanges that even occur in homoge-
neous media with simple geometries (Haggerty and Gorelick, 1995; Carrera et al,

--- PAGE 30 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 29
1998; Haggerty et al, 2000). For these simple conﬁgurations, the tailing of break-
through curves drops as c(t)∼t−1.5.
However, natural systems often display widespread clusters of matrix with
heterogeneous diﬀusion properties (see for example Fig. 8) from which diverse
tailing eﬀects can be expected. Field observations report on power law distributions
of large travel times of concentrations c(t)∼ t−1−β, with power law exponents
spanning the wide range 0 <β < 2 (Haggerty et al, 2000). Another form of tailing
is the one displaying several slopes like the tracer tests by injection-withdrawal in
a single well (”push-pull” experiment) discussed in Gouze et al (2008a).
Gouze et al (2008b) computed the memory function M(t) associated with
solute transport simulated over X-ray micro-tomography images. As a ﬁrst step,
the authors processed the images to delineate the interface between the mobile
immobile domains and to evaluate the diﬀusion coeﬃcient distribution within the
immobile domain. In a second step, they computed the memory function by way
of a constant time step RW approach. The calculation was implemented as follows.
N random walkers uniformly distributed over the mobile-immobile interface are
released at the initial time (t=0). The diﬀusion equation is solved by a discretized
version of the Langevin equation (see (39)) and a speciﬁc procedure is applied
to determine the trajectory of the random walkers through the heterogeneous
pixelized matrix at each time increment. For t> 0, the mobile-immobile interface
is considered as an absorbing boundary, making that random walkers jumping
from the immobile domain toward the mobile domain are removed. The total
number of random walkers inside the immobile domain N′(t) is recorded until the
last particle leaves the immobile domain. The authors showed that the memory
function M(t) could be obtained from the ratio N′(t)/N. Finally, Gouze et al
(2008a) compared the memory function computed at the pore scale on X-ray
micro-tomography images of core samples to the memory function of ﬁeld scale
tracer tests experiments in the limestone (Gouze et al, 2008a) where the core
samples had been imaged. The authors concluded that the non-Fickian dispersion
measured at the meter scale (ﬁeld experiment) was fairly well explained by the
microscale diﬀusion processes in the rock matrix of cores.
Le Borgne and Gouze (2008) developed a speciﬁc model to explain the two-
slope tailing breakthrough curves discussed in Gouze et al (2008a) about push-
pull tracer tests in a single well. The op. cit. authors implemented a continuous
time random walk (CTRW) similar to that presented in section 2.2 and handling a
transition time distributionψ(t) of dual-slope power law type. The best ﬁt of tracer
test data was obtained with a transitional regime modeled by ψ(t)∝t−2 and the
asymptotic regime of a homogeneous dual-porosity model (i.e. ψ(t)∝t−1.5).
As alternative interpretations to the heterogeneous diﬀusion modeled by multi-
rate mass transfer or CTRW, diverse processes have been evoked to explain the
exponents of power-law travel time distributions, including heterogeneous advec-
tion in independent ﬂow paths modeled by stochastic stream tube approaches
(Becker and Shapiro, 2003). Both multi-rate mass transfer and heterogeneous ad-
vection have been modeled by random walk approaches (Kang et al, 2015; Gjetvaj
et al, 2015).
In the CTRW framework, a power law tailing c(t)∼ t−1−β can be modeled
by considering a transition time pdf in the form of ψ(t)∼ t−1−β. The evolution
toward Fickian transport can be modeled by including a cut-oﬀ threshold in the
above power law (Dentz et al, 2004). While CTRW approaches generally describe

--- PAGE 31 ---
30 Benoit Noetinger et al.
non-Fickian transport as series of uncorrelated particle motions of very large dura-
tions, stochastic stream tube approaches (Becker and Shapiro, 2003) assume that
particle velocities are constant along each streamline (particle jumps are therefore
correlated) but diﬀer from a streamline to one another. Becker and Shapiro (2003)
have reported that this process led to the tailing of breakthrough curves obeying
the relationc(t)∼t−2 under convergent tracer test conditions. Diﬀerent exponents
were found for ”push-pull” test depending on the duration of the injection (push)
step. Kang et al (2015) showed that both non-Fickian transport and heteroge-
neous advection could be modeled by CTRW algorithm with correlated transition
times, whose correlation are varied from zero to represent non-Fickian transport,
to inﬁnity to represent heterogeneous advection. It is not always straightforward
to decipher and separate the role of diﬀusive and advective processes as they can
lead to similar power law exponents of breakthrough tails. As shown by Kang
et al (2015), this uncertainty on process controlling ”anomalous” transport can
be resolved by combining tracer test experiments under diﬀerent conditions, in-
cluding cross-borehole and push-pull tests. Cross borehole tests are more sensitive
to heterogeneous advection, while push pull tests are more sensitive to diﬀusive
mechanisms (Fig. 9).
1. illustration of convergent and push pull experiments in factured media 2. Breakthrough curves and random walk model 
Fig. 9 1. Illustration of convergent and push pull tracer experiments in fractured media, from
Kang et al (2015), 2. Breakthrough curves measured at the Ploemeur site (H+ network) under
convergent and push pull conditions, and random walk modeling (dashed lines) with a Markov
Chain CTRW model, from Kang et al (2015).
4.3 Modeling of transport processes under ambient conditions
RW methods have also been used to improve our understanding of transport pro-
cesses under ambient conditions in natural environments. A lot of these studies
have been conducted on fractured rocks using TDRW methods within the frame-
work of discrete dual-porosity representations of the medium. Some of these mod-
els are described in section 3.4.2 and have been used, for example, to describe the
migration of radionuclides through fractured rocks at the ¨Asp¨ o Hard Rock Labo-
ratory in Sweden (Cvetkovic et al, 2004) and the Topopah Spring welded unit in
Yucca Mountain (Pan and Bodvarsson, 2002). Other applications target the frac-
tured Laxemar site in Sweden, which is part of the candidate repositories of spent

--- PAGE 32 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 31
nuclear fuel (Cvetkovic and Frampton, 2012), and the Kamaiski experimental mine
site in Japan (Dershowitz and Miller, 1995).
Transport processes have also been modeled with RW methods in the context
of colloidal transport in a shear zone (Kosakowski, 2004), for identifying chemical
retention times in water catchments (Scher et al, 2002b), and for solute trans-
port in rivers (Boano et al, 2007). CTRW has also been used to interpret the
observations made in a heterogeneous alluvial aquifer at the Macrodispersion Ex-
periment (MADE) site of the Columbus Air Force Base (Mississippi) (Berkowitz
and Scher, 1998) and in a fractured till located on the island of Funen (Denmark)
(Kosakowski et al, 2001). Finally, CTRW was also used for breakthrough curve
analysis of numerical experiments mimicking transport in fault zones (O’Brien
et al, 2003b,a).
4.4 Other applications
As explained in section 2.4, CTRW has been largely used as average transport
model; in fact the ensemble particle motions in many quenched disordered systems
obey a CTRW dynamic (Berkowitz et al, 2006). For this reason and motivated by
the results of single particle tracking for diﬀusion in heterogeneous media, CTRW
models has been used to study the question of ergodicity in complex media (Bel
and Barkai, 2005; He et al, 2008; Barkai et al, 2012; Metzler et al, 2014). More
recently, Dentz et al (2016) used TDRW to study the self-averaging properties
and ergodicity of subdiﬀusion in random media. As seen in section 2.3, TDRW
is equivalent to the discretized ADE and allows to distinguish between ensemble
particle motion (CTRW) and diﬀusive random motion in a single realization.
Todays, the limits of RW and TDRW methods are for some extent in the recon-
struction of concentration ﬁelds and their use for reactive transport simulations
involving non-linear chemical reactions. A few methods have been developed to
reconstruct the concentration ﬁeld a posteriori from the random walkers while
keeping their independence [Fernandez-Garcia and Sanchez-Vila, 2011]. Others
decouple the advective and dispersive terms, simulate the advective term with a
particle tracking method and the dispersive term with Smoothed Particle Hydro-
dynamic (SPH) methods (Herrera et al, 2009, 2010; Herrera and Beckie, 2013).
With SPH, each particle is considered as an elementary volume of water contain-
ing solutes and exchanging mass with the neighboring volumes according to a
prescribed interpolation kernel, which is also eventually used to reconstruct the
concentration ﬁeld. With this method, random walkers remain independent and
dispersive processes stem from the particle positions without feedback from the
concentration ﬁeld to the particle displacements. Heterogeneous distributions of
particles with rarefaction in low ﬂow zones may critically decrease the accuracy of
calculated concentrations. Increasing the particle number or performing particle
re-meshing are sometimes necessary and impact numerical performances or nu-
merical diﬀusion. To summarize, these methods are intermediary between RW, full
SPH, and Particle Strength Exchange (PSE) methods that introduce the inﬂuence
of concentration ﬁelds on the motion of particles and subsequent interdependence
of the particles (Beaudoin et al, 2002, 2003; Monaghan, 2005; Tartakovsky and
Meakin, 2006). Like SPH and PSE, several implementations of RW and TDRW
can be considered as mesh-free methods that can easily adapt their resolution to

--- PAGE 33 ---
32 Benoit Noetinger et al.
local physical or chemical properties without extensive re-meshing eﬀorts. When
chemistry mostly consists of ﬂuid-rock interactions rather of reactions in solution,
particles can again be taken as water volumes or ”ﬁnite cells” with their embed-
ded solutes chemically interacting with the solid (Besnard et al, 2011; Sun, 1999,
2002). This role is especially well suited when dispersion is dominated by ﬂuid-
rock interactions or mobile-immobile types of exchanges (Cirpka, 2005; Michalak
and Kitanidis, 2000). More generally, appropriate combination of these Lagrange-
based methods could be welcomed to locally separate solute dispersion from solute
mixing. Dispersion would be simulated as particle movements, and mixing as ex-
changes between particles. The sharing between dispersion and mixing could be
derived from some local properties of the particle position or of the reconstructed
concentration pattern (de Dreuzy et al, 2012; Le Borgne et al, 2011, 2015). In this
framework, RW and TDRW methods have a strong capacity to integrate detailed
physical processes beyond the resolution of the coarse mesh-cell scale that may be
used in practical applications, for example by means of the ﬂexibility oﬀered by
the choice of the transition time distribution.
Finally, RW methods have been used at the small scale to model heat transfer
(Emmanuel and Berkowitz, 2007) and emulsion transport in porous media (Cortis
and Ghezzehei, 2007). At a larger scale, additional applications are related to the
interpretation of hydraulic pumping tests in heterogeneous porous media (Cortis
and Knudby, 2006), to the impact of matrix heterogeneity on the residence times
of solutes in fractured media (Robinet et al, 2007), and to the interpretation of
water age data sampled under pumping conditions (Leray et al, 2014).
5 Conclusions
RW methods have become a mature tool with skills to handle eﬃciently diﬀusion
processes or advection dispersion in porous media riddled with multiscale quenched
heterogeneities, including complex fracture patterns. The spatial scales of interest
range from nanometers (molecules) and microns for simulations over images of the
pore space to kilometers for ﬁeld scale investigations. Radially convergent ﬂows
can also be accounted for. The RW class of methods is usually easy to imple-
ment and possesses a natural structure adapted to High Performance Computing
(HPC), which in turn renders the methods powerful and suited to up-scaling appli-
cations. CTRW and TDRW have earned a rigorous probabilistic connection with
ﬁnite volume methods which allow us to compare the calculations with the con-
ventional equations of the physics of ﬂow and transport. All these features provide
a natural framework for elaborating new theories of normal or anomalous large-
scale dispersion as they give a natural picture of solute mixing and spreading. RW
techniques highlight the competition between advection, dispersion and the under-
lying quenched disorder of the medium. The eﬀects of retention and of chemical
reactions can also be modeled.
Future research might take several directions. To mention a few, it could be
worth ﬁnding some robust parameterizations of the scattering kernelsM(a,t ; x−a)
or of the transfer functionsf(.) and link them with the medium disorder (Noetinger
and Gautier, 1998; Liu et al, 2000). Adsorption processes and chemical reactions
could also be simulated, at least in the linear regime, by adding a suitable variable
characterizing the state of the particle during its random motion. For example, one

--- PAGE 34 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 33
could consider a two state vector denoted x(t)→ x(t)
[c1(t)
c2(t)
]
, in which the indi-
cator of the state of the particle c1(t) can take the value 0 or 1, (c2(t) = 1−c1(t)).
These binary states could correspond to the fact that a particle is in the fractures
or not, or is in the phase of a speciﬁc chemical component, etc... Choosing suitable
transition probabilities for the elementary time step in the corresponding Langevin
formulation (thus allowing the particle to swap between states randomly) would
provide a direct RW interpretation of the double porosity equations (60) or of
chemical reactions in solution and with the solid. Another important topic is be-
ing able to generalize RW methods with the aim of coupling explicitly the particle
concentrations and properties of ﬂuid and ﬂuid ﬂow, leading for instance to vis-
cous or density driven ﬁngering patterns. The diﬃculty resides in the fact that at
any time ﬂow depends on the whole map of particle concentrations with the conse-
quence of manipulating fully coupled ﬂow-transport problem (Saﬀman and Taylor,
1958; Dagan, 1989) where RW methods lose eﬃciency (cumbersome calculations
of local concentrations, breaks in parallel chains of computations, limitations for
solving non-linearity, etc.) At ﬁrst glance, the framework of independent particles
undergoing RW seems not suited to that kind of complex coupling with non-linear
relationships between ﬂow and transport. Nevertheless, the successful RW picture
of Diﬀusion Limited Aggregation (DLA) provided in Witten and Sander (1983)
and Tang (1985) and corresponding to ﬂuid ﬁngering with inﬁnite mobility con-
trasts gives hope that RW could come out as a relevant method to address that
kind of issues. In particular, framing the macroscopic depiction of the motion of
unstable interfaces in random quenched disordered media could be undertaken by
relying upon a RW approach with particle motion conditioned by the degrees of
freedom describing the ﬂuid fronts (Nœtinger et al, 2004; Tallakstad et al, 2009;
Teodorovich et al, 2011).
In addition, we can mention a last application of RW to calibrate the large-scale
model parameters that are needed in the traded or industrial simulators built for
the purpose of diverse applications at the ﬁeld scale. Among these practical tools,
some operational methods use RW techniques in order to sample the admissible
space of the parameters to be calibrated. Such approaches were followed by (Hu,
2000; Romary, 2009). Increasingbly popular Kalman Filtering approaches (Oliver
et al, 1997; Evensen, 2009; Aanonsen et al, 2009) may also be included as being a
particular class of RW methods applied at the reservoir scale.
Finally, this review tentatively showed that the RW methods and more gen-
erally the Lagrangian approaches to ﬂuid dynamics, was still a fairway for fertile
research activity in the domain of ﬂow and transport in porous (fractured) media.
Comparisons with other methods were not considered to emphasize the general
elegance of random walk methods in the way they tackle various problems.
A Langevin equation and Fokker Planck equation
In this section, we show the equivalence between the Fokker-Planck equation (1) and the
Langevin equation (2). To this end, we use a duality argument. Letf(x) be a twice diﬀerentiable
function. We consider now the average⟨f[x(t)]⟩. By virtue of (3), this average may be written
as
⟨f[x(t)]⟩ =
∫
dxP (x,t )f(x). (57)

--- PAGE 35 ---
34 Benoit Noetinger et al.
We consider now⟨f[x(t +dt)]⟩. To this end, we note that x(t +dt) is according to (2)
x(t +dt) = x(t) + v[x(t)]dt +
√
2B[x(t)]·η(t)≡ x(t) +∆x(t) (58)
where we use the Ito interpretation of the stochastic integral (Risken, 1996); η(t) is a Gaussian
random variable with 0 mean and unit variance. Taylor expansion off[x(t)+∆x(t)] consistently
up to order dt then gives
f[x(t +dt)]−f[x(t)] =∇f[x(t)]· v[x(t)]dt +∇⊗∇ f[x(t)] : B[x(t)]dt. (59)
It is worthwile noting that this equation is also called the Ito formula, or chain rule of stochastic
calculus (Risken, 1996). Taking the average of (59) and using (57) gives after integration by
parts the Fokker-Planck equation (1).
B Dual-porosity models
Fractured porous media are characterized by a high property contrast between fractures and
matrix. This leads to introducing a new class of models, starting from the steady state double
porosity models (Barenblatt and Zheltov, 1960; Warren and Root, 1963) as derived by Arbogast
et al (1990) and Quintard and Whitaker (1993) that couple matrix and fracture by means of
a linear exchange term:
{
φfVf
∂Pf (x,t)
∂t = Df∇2Pf (x,t ) +Q(x,t )
φmVm
∂Pm(x,t)
∂t = Dm∇2Pm(x,t )−Q(x,t ).
(60)
Here, φfVf and φmVm represent respectively the overall proportions of fracture and matrix
volumes (weighted by the relevant porosity and compressibility). The operation∗ represents a
convolution operator. The model is closed once the interporosity ﬂux Q(x,t ) is expressed as a
function of Pf (x,t ) and Pm(x,t ). In the steady state case, Q(x,t ) is given by:
Q(x,t ) =λ
(
Pm(x,t )−Pf (x,t )
)
. (61)
The transfer coeﬃcient λ, reciprocal of a time depends mainly on the geometry of the matrix
blocks. It is proportional to Dm. Its determination from the detailed DFN geometry will be
discussed in section 3.4.1.
More general models using memory functions accounting for more details of the diﬀusion
inside the matrix can be introduced (Odeh, 1965; de Swaan, 1976; Carslaw and Jaeger, 1986;
Daviau, 1986; Chen, 1989; de Swann and Ramirez-Villa, 1993). These models belongs to the
general class of Multiple Rate Mass Transfer (MRMT) models or Multiple Interacting Continua
(MINC) (Narasimhan and Pruess, 1988; Haggerty and Gorelick, 1995; de Dreuzy et al, 2013).
These models correspond to quite diﬀerent formulations of the same physics diﬀer through the
formulation of the exchange term. The latter appears as a time convolution expressed by:
Q(x,t ) =
∫t
0G(t−τ)
(d(Pm(x,τ )−Pf (x,τ ))
dτ
)
dτ. (62)
In all cases, the exchange kernel G(t) is scaled by a parameter λ which depends only on
the geometry of the matrix blocks. It was shown in Landereau et al (2001) and Babey et al
(2015) that Multiple porosity models, MRMT models and transient models are equivalent and
correspond to diﬀerent formulations of the same idea.
In most cases, the term Dm∇2Pm(x,t ) may be neglected in the double porosity equa-
tions (60), so Pm(x,t ) may be eliminated from the equations to provide the following generic
form:
∫ t
0
dτ(φfVfδ(t−τ) +φmVmf(t−τ))∂Pf (x,τ )
∂τ =∇.(Df∇Pf (x,t )). (63)

--- PAGE 36 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 35
The quantity f(t) is the time dependent exchange function. Introducing the average pressure
in the fractures < ˆPf > (t) solution of the following initial value problem:
φ(x)∂Pf (x,t )
∂t =∇.(D(x)∇Pf (x,t )) (64)
∀x∈ΩfPf (x,t = 0) = 1 (65)
∀x∈ΩmPf (x,t = 0) = 0 (66)
<Pf > (t) = 1
|Ωf|
∫
Ωf
dxPf (x,t ) (67)
It is possible to show the following relation in the Laplace domain:
<Pf > (s) = φfVf
s(φfVf +φmVmf(s)). (68)
The practical interest of introducing the f(s) function is that it can be shown that the general
solution of a double porosity system (60) can be directly related to a solution of a single
porosity equation replacing the argument s of the single porosity solution by the argument
s(φfVf +sφmVmf(s)). The large amount of analytical single porosity solutions that are well
known is suﬃcient for most practical situations. This means that all the double porosity
behavior is captured by f(s), which appears to be a renormalized apparent storativity. The
initial value problem (67) deﬁning < ˆPf > (t) has in turn a simple RW interpretation. The
quantity< Pf > (t) corresponds to the average proportion of particle undergoing RW (with
diﬀusivity Dm) that belongs to the fractures at time t given they was released at a random
location in the fractures at time t = 0. In the steady state case, the function f(s) is given by
(Noetinger and Estebenet, 2000; Noetinger et al, 2001a):
f(s) = λ
φmVms +λ. (69)
It appears that λ is a characteristic diﬀusion time in the matrix. Explicit expressions may be
given for f(s) for either a layered medium, or for spherical blocks:
– for the layered case
f(s) =
√
λ
3sVm
tanh
√
3Vms
λ , (70)
– for the spherical case
f(s) = λ
5sVm
(√
15Vms
λ cotanh
√
15Vms
λ − 1
)
. (71)
These generic forms, or others can be used for large scale applications, solving (63) using any
numerical approach. It remains to be able to evaluate the transfer coeﬃcient λ or the full f(t)
function. This is the objective of section 3.4.1.
References
Aanonsen SI, Nævdal G, Oliver DS, Reynolds AC, Vall` es B, et al (2009) The ensemble kalman
ﬁlter in reservoir engineering–a review. Spe Journal 14(03):393–412
Abramowitz M, Stegun IA (1972) Handbook of Mathematical Functions. Dover Publications,
New York
Acuna JA, Yortsos YC (1995) Application of fractal geometry to the study of networks
of fractures and their pressure transient. Water Resources Research 31(3):527–540, DOI
10.1029/94WR02260
de Anna P, Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Tartakovsky A, Bolster D, Davy P (2013) Flow intermit-
tency, dispersion, and correlated continuous time random walks in porous media. Physical
Review Letters 110(18), DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.184502

--- PAGE 37 ---
36 Benoit Noetinger et al.
Arbogast T, Douglas J, Hornung U (1990) Derivation of the double porosity model of single
phase ﬂow via homogeneization theory. SIAM J Math Anal 21(4):823–836
de Arcangelis L, Koplik J, Redner S, Wilkinson D (1986) Hydrodynamic dispersion
in network models of porous media. Physical Review Letters 57(8):986–999, DOI
10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.996
Aris R (1956) On the dispersion of a solute in a ﬂuid ﬂowing through a tube. In: Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London A-Mathematical and Physical Sciences, vol 235, pp 67–77,
DOI 10.1098/rspa.1956.0065
Babey T, de Dreuzy J-R, Casenave C (2015) Multi-Rate Mass Transfer (MRMT) models
for general diﬀusive porosity structures. Advances in Water Resources 76:146–156, DOI
10.1016/j.advwatres.2014.12.006
Barenblatt GI, Zheltov YP (1960) Fundamental equations of homogeneous liquids in ﬁssured
rocks. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 132(3):545–548
Barkai E, Garini Y, Metzler R (2012) Strange kinetics of single molecules in living cells. Physics
Today 65(8):29–35, DOI 10.1063/PT.3.1677
Barker JA (1988) A generalized radial ﬂow model for hydraulic tests in fractured rock. Water
Resources Research 24(10):1796–1804, DOI 10.1029/WR024i010p01796
Barthelemy P, Bertolotti J, Wiersma DS (2008) A L´ evy ﬂight for light. Nature 453(7194):495–
498, DOI 10.1038/nature06948
Bear J (1973) Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media. Dover Publications
Beaudoin A, de Dreuzy JR (2013) Numerical assessment of 3-D macrodispersion in heteroge-
neous porous media. Water Resources Research 49(5):2489–2496, DOI 10.1002/wrcr.20206
Beaudoin A, Huberson S, Rivoalen E (2002) Anisotropic particle method. Comptes Rendus
Mecanique 330(1):51–56, DOI 10.1016/S1631-0721(02)01429-8
Beaudoin A, Huberson S, Rivoalen E (2003) Simulation of anisotropic diﬀusion by means
of a diﬀusion velocity method. Journal of Computational Physics 186(1):122–135, DOI
10.1016/S0021-991(03)00024-X
Beaudoin A, de Dreuzy JR, Erhel J (2007) An eﬃcient parallel tracker for advection-diﬀusion
simulations in heterogeneous porous media. In: Springer-Verlag B, Heidelberg (eds) Europar,
pp 28–31
Beaudoin A, de Dreuzy JR, Erhel J (2010) Numerical Monte Carlo analysis of the inﬂuence
of pore-scale dispersion on macrodispersion in 2-D heterogeneous porous media. Water Re-
sources Research 46:12, DOI 10.1029/2010WR009576
Bechtold M, Vanderborght J, Ippisch O, Vereecken H (2011) Eﬃcient random walk par-
ticle tracking algorithm for advective-dispersive transport in media with discontinu-
ous dispersion coeﬃcients and water contents. Water Resources Research 47:10, DOI
10.1029/2010WR010267
Becker MW, Shapiro AM (2003) Interpreting tracer breakthrough tailing from diﬀerent forced-
gradient tracer experiment conﬁgurations in fractured bedrock. Water Resources Research
39(1):1024, DOI 10.1029/2001WR001190
Bel G, Barkai E (2005) Weak ergodicity breaking in the continuous-time random walk. Physical
Review Letters 94:240,602, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.240602
Berkowitz B, Balberg I (1993) Percolation theory and its application to groundwater hydrology.
Water Resources Research 29(4):775–794, DOI 10.1029/92WR02707
Berkowitz B, Scher H (1997) Anomalous transport in random fracture networks. Physical
Review Letters 79(20):4038–4041, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.79.4038
Berkowitz B, Scher H (1998) Theory of anomalous chemical transport in random fracture
networks. Physical Review E 57(5):5858–5869, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevE.57.5858
Berkowitz B, Naumann C, Smith L (1994) Mass-transfer at fracture intersections -
An evaluation of mixing models. Water Resources Research 30(6):1765–1773, DOI
10.1029/94WR00432
Berkowitz B, Scher H, Silliman S (2000) Anomalous transport in laboratory-scale, heteroge-
neous porous media. Water Resources Research 36(1):149–158, DOI 10.1029/1999WR900295
Berkowitz B, Klafter J, Metzler R, Scher H (2002) Physical pictures of transport in hetero-
geneous media: Advection-dispersion, random-walk, and fractional derivative formulations.
Water Resources Research 38(10):1191, DOI 10.1029/2001WR001030
Berkowitz B, Cortis A, Dentz M, Scher H (2006) Modeling non-Fickian transport in geological
formations as a continuous time random walk. Reviews of Geophysics 44(2):RG2003, DOI
10.1029/2005RG000178

--- PAGE 38 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 37
Besnard K, de Dreuzy JR, Davy P, Aquilina L (2011) A modiﬁed lagrangian-volumes method to
simulate nonlinearly and kinetically sorbing solute transport in heterogeneous porous media.
Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 120-21(SI):89–98, DOI 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2010.03.004
Bijeljic B, Mostaghimi P, Blunt M (2013a) Insights into non-ﬁckian solute transport in car-
bonates. Water Resources Research 49(5):2714–2728
Bijeljic B, Raeini A, Mostaghimi P, Blunt M (2013b) Predictions of non-ﬁckian solute transport
in diﬀerent classes of porous media using direct simulation on pore-scale images. Physical
Review E 87(1), DOI 10.1103/PhysRevE.87.013011
Boano F, Packman AI, Cortis A, Revelli R, Ridolﬁ L (2007) A continuous time random
walk approach to the stream transport of solutes. Water Resources Research 43(10), DOI
10.1029/2007WR006062
Bodin J (2015) From analytical solutions of solute transport equations to multidimensional
time-domain random walk (TDRW) algorithms. Water Resources Research 51(3):1860–1871,
DOI 10.1002/2014WR015910
Bodin J, Porel G, Delay F (2003) Simulation of solute transport in discrete fracture networks
using the time domain random walk method. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 208(3-
4):297–304, DOI 10.1016/S0012-821X(03)00052-9
Bodin J, Porel G, Delay F, Ubertosi F, Bernard S, de Dreuzy JR (2007) Simulation and
analysis of solute transport in 2D fracture/pipe networks: The SOLFRAC program. Journal
of Contaminant Hydrology 89(1-2):1–28, DOI 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2006.07.005
Bouchaud JP, Georges A (1990) Anomalous diﬀusion in disordered media: statistical
mechanisms, models and physical applications. Physics Reports 195(4-5):127–293, DOI
10.1016/0370-1573(90)90099-N
Brezzi F, Fortin M (1991) Mixed and Hybrid Finite Element Methods. Springer, Berlin
Bromly M, Hinz C (2004) Non-ﬁckian transport in homogeneous unsaturated repacked sand.
Water Resources Research 40(7), DOI 10.1029/2003WR002579
Bruderer C, Bernab´ e Y (2001) Network modeling of dispersion: transition from taylor disper-
sion in homogeneous networks to mechanical dispersion in very heterogeneous ones. Water
Resources Research 37(4):897–908, DOI 10.1029/2000WR900362
Cacas MC, Ledoux E, de Marsily G, Barbreau A, Calmels P, Gaillard B, Margritta R (1990)
Modeling fracture ﬂow with a stochastic discrete network: Calibration and validation. 2. The
transport model. Water Resources Research 26(3):491–500, DOI 10.1029/WR026i003p00491
Carrera J, Sanchez-Vila X, Benet I, Medina A, Galarza G, Guimera J (1998) On matrix diﬀu-
sion: formulations, solution methods and qualitative eﬀects. Hydrogeology Journal 6(1):178–
190, DOI 10.1007/s100400050143
Carslaw HS, Jaeger JC (1986) Conduction of heat in solids. Oxford science publications,
Clarendon Press
Chang J, Yortsos YC (1990) Pressure transient analysis of fractal reservoirs. SPE Formation
Evaluation 5(1), DOI 10.2118/18170-PA
Charlaix E, Guyon E, Roux S (1987) Permeability of a random array of fractures of widely
varying apertures. Transport in Porous Media 2(1):31–43
Chavent G, Roberts JE (1991) A uniﬁed physical presentation of mixed, mixed-hybrid ﬁnite
elements and standard ﬁnite diﬀerence approximations for the determination of velocities
in waterﬂow problems. Advances in Water Resources 14(6):329–348, DOI 10.1016/0309-
1708(91)90020-O
Chen ZX (1989) Transient Flow of Slightly Compressible Fluids Through Double-porosity,
Double-permeability systems - A state-of-the-art review. Transport in Porous Media
4(2):147–184, DOI 10.1007/BF00134995
Cirpka OA (2005) Eﬀects of sorption on transverse mixing in transient ﬂows. Journal of Con-
taminant Hydrology 78(3):207–229, DOI 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2005.05.008
Cordes C, Kinzelbach W (1992) Continuous groundwater velocity ﬁeld and path lines in linear,
bilinear and trilinear ﬁnite elements. Water Resources Research 28(11):2903–2911, DOI
10.1029/92WR01686
Cordes C, Kinzelbach W (1996) Comment on ”Application of the mixed hybrid ﬁnite ele-
ment approximation in a groundwater ﬂow model: Luxury or necessity?”. Water Resources
Research 32(6):1905–1911, DOI 10.1029/96WR00567
Cortis A, Berkowitz B (2004) Anomalous transport in “classical ” soil and sand columns. Soil
Science Society of America Journal 68(5):1539–1548
Cortis A, Ghezzehei TA (2007) On the transport of emulsions in porous media. Journal of
Colloid and Interface Science 313(1):1–4, DOI 10.1016/j.jcis.2007.04.021

--- PAGE 39 ---
38 Benoit Noetinger et al.
Cortis A, Knudby C (2006) A continuous time random walk approach to transient ﬂow in het-
erogeneous porous media. Water Resources Research 42(10), DOI 10.1029/2006WR005227
Cvetkovic V, Frampton A (2012) Solute transport and retention in three-dimensional fracture
networks. Water Resources Research 48, DOI 10.1029/2011WR011086
Cvetkovic V, Painter S, Outters N, Selroos JO (2004) Stochastic simulation of radionuclide mi-
gration in discretely fractured rock near the ¨Asp¨ o Hard Rock Laboratory. Water Resources
Research 40(2), DOI 10.1029/2003WR002655
Dagan G (1989) Flow and transport in porous formations. Springer-Verlag GmbH & Co. KG.
Danckwerts PV (1952) The deﬁnition and measurements of some characteristics of mixtures.
Appl Sci Res 3(4):279–296
Daviau F (1986) Interpr´ etation des essais de puits, les m´ ethodes nouvelles, technip edn. Pub-
lications de l’institut francais du p´ etrole, Paris
Delay F, Bodin J (2001) Time domain random walk method to simulate transport by
advection-dispersion and matrix diﬀusion in fractured networks. Geophysical Research Let-
ters 28(21):4051–4054, DOI 10.1029/2001GL013698
Delay F, Porel G, Sardini P (2002) Modelling diﬀusion in a heterogeneous rock matrix with a
time-domain lagrangian method and an inversion procedure. Comptes Rendus Geoscience
334(13):967–973, DOI 10.1016/S1631-0713(02)01835-7
Delay F, Ackerer P, Danquigny C (2005) Simulating solute transport in porous or fractured
formations using random walk particle tracking: A review. Vadose Zone Journal 4(2):360–
379, DOI 10.2136/vzj2004.0125
Delorme M, Daniel JM, Kada-Kloucha C, Khvoenkova N, Schueller S, Souque C (2013a) An eﬃ-
cient model to simulate reservoir stimulation and induced microseismic events on 3D discrete
fracture network for unconventional reservoirs. Unconventional Resources Technology Con-
ference, 12-14 August, Denver, Colorado, USA, pp 1433–1442, DOI 10.1190/URTEC2013-
146
Delorme M, Mota RO, Khvoenkova N, Fourno A, Noetinger B (2013b) A methodology to char-
acterize fractured reservoirs constrained by statistical geological analysis and production: a
real ﬁeld case study. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 374(1):273–288
Dentz M, Cortis A, Scher H, Berkowitz B (2004) Time behavior of solute transport in heteroge-
neous media: transition from anomalous to normal transport. Advances in Water Resources
27(2):155–173, DOI 10.1016/j.advwatres.2003.11.002
Dentz M, Le Borgne T, Englert A, Bijeljic B (2011) Mixing, spreading and reaction in hetero-
geneous media: A brief review. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 120-21(SI):1–17, DOI
10.1016/j.jconhyd.2010.05.002
Dentz M, Gouze P, Russian A, Dweik J, Delay F (2012) Diﬀusion and trapping in hetero-
geneous media: An inhomogeneous continuous time random walk approach. Advances in
Water Resources 49:13–22, DOI 10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.07.015
Dentz M, Russian A, Gouze P (2016) Self-averaging and ergodicity of subdiﬀusion in quenched
random media. Physical Review E in press
Dershowitz W, Miller I (1995) Dual porosity fracture ﬂow and transport. Geophysical Research
Letters 22(11):1441–1444, DOI 10.1029/95GL01099
de Dreuzy JR, Davy P, Berkowitz B (2001) Advective transport in the percolation backbone
in two dimensions. Physical Review E 64(5)
de Dreuzy JR, Beaudoin A, Erhel J (2007) Asymptotic dispersion in 2D heterogeneous porous
media determined by parallel numerical simulations. Water Resources Research 43(10), DOI
10.1029/2006WR005394
de Dreuzy JR, Carrera J, Dentz M, Le Borgne T (2012) Time evolution of mixing in hetero-
geneous porous media. Water Resources Research 48, DOI 10.1029/2011WR011360
de Dreuzy JR, Rapaport A, Babey T, Harmand J (2013) Inﬂuence of porosity structures
on mixing-induced reactivity at chemical equilibrium in mobile/immobile Multi-Rate Mass
Transfer (MRMT) and Multiple INteracting Continua (MINC) models. Water Resources
Research 49(12):8511–8530, DOI 10.1002/2013WR013808
Edery Y, Guadagnini A, Scher H, Berkowitz B (2014) Origins of anomalous transport in het-
erogeneous media: Structural and dynamic controls. Water Resources Research 50(2):1490–
1505, DOI 10.1002/2013WR015111
Einstein A (1956) Investigations on the theory of the Brownian movement. Dover Publication,
New York
Emmanuel S, Berkowitz B (2007) Continuous time random walks and heat transfer in porous
media. Transport in Porous Media 67(3):413–430, DOI 10.1007/s11242-006-9033-z

--- PAGE 40 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 39
Evensen G (2009) Data assimilation: the ensemble Kalman ﬁlter. Springer Science & Business
Media
Fleury M, Bauer D, N´ eel M (2015) Modeling of super-dispersion in unsaturated porous media
using nmr propagators. Microporous and Mesoporous Materials 205:75–78
Geiger S, Cortis A, Birkholzer J (2010) Upscaling solute transport in naturally fractured porous
media with the continuous time random walk method. Water Resources Research 46(12)
Gjetvaj F, Russian A, Gouze P, Dentz M (2015) Dual control of ﬂow ﬁeld heterogeneity and
immobile porosity on non-Fickian transport in Berea sandstone. Water Resources Research
51(10):8273–8293, DOI 10.1002/2015WR017645
Gouze P, Luquot L (2011) X-ray microtomography characterization of porosity, permeability
and reactive surface changes during dissolution. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 120-
121(SI):45–55, DOI 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2010.07.004
Gouze P, Le Borgne T, Leprovost R, Lods G, Poidras T, Pezard P (2008a) Non-Fickian dis-
persion in porous media: 1. Multiscale measurements using single-well injection withdrawal
tracer tests. Water Resources Research 44(6), DOI 10.1029/2007WR006278
Gouze P, Melean Y, Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Carrera J (2008b) Non-ﬁckian dispersion in porous
media explained by heterogeneous microscale matrix diﬀusion. Water Resources Research
44(11), DOI 10.1029/2007WR006690
Guillon V, Fleury M, Bauer D, N´ eel MC (2013) Superdispersion in homogeneous un-
saturated porous media using NMR propagators. Physical Review E 87(4), DOI
10.1103/PhysRevE.87.043007
Guillon V, Bauer D, Fleury M, N´ eel MC (2014) Computing the longtime behaviour of NMR
propagators in porous media using a pore network random walk model. Transport in Porous
Media 101(2):251–267, DOI 10.1007/s11242-013-0243-x
Haggerty R, Gorelick SM (1995) Multiple-rate mass transfer for modeling diﬀusion and surface
reactions in media with pore-scale heterogeneity. Water Resources Research 31(10):2383–
2400, DOI 10.1029/95WR01583
Haggerty R, McKenna SA, Meigs LC (2000) On the late time behavior of tracer test break-
through curves. Water Resources Research 36(12):3467–3479, DOI 10.1029/2000WR900214
Hatano Y, Hatano N (1998) Dispersive transport of ions in column experiments: An
explanation of long-tailed proﬁles. Water Resources Research 34(5):1027–1033, DOI
10.1029/98WR00214
He Y, Burov S, Metzler R, Barkai E (2008) Random time-scale invariant diﬀusion and transport
coeﬃcients. Physical Review Letters 101(5), DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.058101
Herrera PA, Beckie RD (2013) An assessment of particle methods for approximating anisotropic
dispersion. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids 71(5):634–651, DOI
10.1002/ﬂd.3676
Herrera PA, Massabo M, Beckie RD (2009) A meshless method to simulate solute trans-
port in heterogeneous porous media. Advances in Water Resources 32(3):413–429, DOI
10.1016/j.advwatres.2008.12.005
Herrera PA, Valocchi AJ, Beckie RD (2010) A multidimensional streamline-based method
to simulate reactive solute transport in heterogeneous porous media. Advances in Water
Resources 33(7):711–727, DOI 10.1016/j.advwatres.2010.03.001
Holzner M, Morales VL, Willmann M, Dentz M (2015) Intermittent lagrangian velocities and
accelerations in three-dimensional porous medium ﬂow. Physical Review E 92(1), DOI
10.1103/PhysRevE.92.013015
Hoteit H, Erhel J, Mos R, Philippe B, Ackerer P (2002a) Numerical reliability for mixed
methods applied to ﬂow problems in porous media. Computational Geosciences 6(2):161–
194, DOI 10.1023/A:1019988901420
Hoteit H, Mose R, Younes A, Lehmann F, Ackerer P (2002b) Three-dimensional modeling of
mass transfer in porous media using the mixed hybrid ﬁnite elements and the random-walk
methods. Mathematical Geology 34(4):435–456, DOI 10.1023/A:1015083111971
Hu LY (2000) Gradual deformation and iterative calibration of gaussian-related stochastic
models. Mathematical Geology 32(1):87–108
Jimenez-Hornero F, Giraldez J, Laguna A, Pachepsky Y (2005) Continuous time random walks
for analyzing the transport of a passive tracer in a single ﬁssure. Water Resources Research
41(4), DOI 10.1029/2004WR003852
Kang PK, Dentz M, Le Borgne T, Juanes R (2011) Spatial Markov model of anoma-
lous transport through random lattice networks. Physical Review Letters 107(18), DOI
10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.180602

--- PAGE 41 ---
40 Benoit Noetinger et al.
Kang PK, de Anna P, Nunes JP, Bijeljic B, Blunt M, Juanes R (2014) Pore-scale intermittent
velocity structure underpinning anomalous transport through 3D porous media. Geophysical
Research Letters 41(17):6184–6190, DOI 10.1002/2014GL061475
Kang PK, Le Borgne T, Dentz T, Bour O, Juanes R (2015) Impact of velocity correlation and
distribution on transport in fractured media: ﬁeld evidence and theoretical model. Water
Resources Research 51(2):940–959, DOI 10.1002/2014WR015799
Kenkre VM, Montroll EW, Shlesinger MF (1973) Generalized master equations for continuous-
time random walks. J Stat Phys 9(1):45–50
Khvoenkova N, Delorme M (2011) An optimal method to model transient ﬂows in 3D discrete
fracture network. IAMG conference 2011:1238–1249, DOI 10.5242/iamg.2011.0088
Kim IC, Torquato S (1992) Eﬀective conductivity of suspensions of overlapping spheres. Jour-
nal of Applied Physics 71(6):2727–2735, DOI 10.1063/1.351046
Kinzelbach W (1988) The random walk method in pollutant transport simulation. In: Ground-
water ﬂow and quality modelling, Springer, pp 227–245
Kinzelbach W, Uﬃnk G (1991) The random walk method and extensions in groundwater
modelling, vol Transport Processes in Porous Media. Springer, Netherlands
Kitanidis P (1994) The concept of the dilution index. Water Resources Research 30(7):2011–
2026, DOI 10.1029/94WR00762
Klafter J, Silbey R (1980) Derivation of the continuous-time random-walk equation. Physical
Review Letters 44(2):55–58, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.44.55
Klafter J, Sokolov I (2005) Anomalous diﬀusion spreads its wings. Phys World 18(8):29–32
Koplik J, Redner S, Wilkinson D (1988) Transport and dispersion in random networks with
percolation disorder. Physical Review A 37(7):2619–2636, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevA.37.2619
Kosakowski G (2004) Anomalous transport of colloids and solutes in a shear zone. Journal of
Contaminant Hydrology 72(1-4):23–46, DOI 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2003.10.005
Kosakowski G, Berkowitz B (1999) Flow pattern variability in natural fracture intersections.
Geophysical Research Letters 26(12):1765–1768, DOI 10.1029/1999GL900344
Kosakowski G, Berkowitz B, Scher H (2001) Analysis of ﬁeld observations of tracer transport
in a fractured till. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 47(1):29–51, DOI 10.1016/S0169-
7722(00)00140-6
LaBolle EM, Quastel J, Fogg GE (1998) Diﬀusion theory for transport in porous media:
Transition-probability densities of diﬀusion processes corresponding to advection-dispersion
equations. Water Resources Research 34(7):1685–1693
Landereau P, Noetinger B, Quintard M (2001) Quasi-steady two-equation models for diﬀusive
transport in fractured porous media: large-scale properties for densely fractured systems.
Advances in Water Resources 24(8):863–876, DOI 10.1016/S0309-1708(01)00015-X
Le Borgne T, Gouze P (2008) Non-ﬁckian dispersion in porous media: 2. Model vali-
dation from measurements at diﬀerent scales. Water Resources Research 44(6), DOI
10.1029/2007WR006279
Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Carrera J (2008a) A Lagrangian statistical model for trans-
port in highly heterogeneous velocity ﬁelds. Physical Review Letters 101(9), DOI
10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.090601
Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Carrera J (2008b) Spatial Markov processes for modeling la-
grangian particle dynamics in heterogeneous porous media. Physical Review E 78(2,2),
DOI 10.1103/PhysRevE.78.026308
Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Bolster D, Carrera J, de Dreuzy JR, Davy P (2010) Non-ﬁckian mixing:
Temporal evolution of the scalar dissipation rate in heterogeneous porous media. Advances
in Water Resources 33(12):1468–1475, DOI 10.1016/j.advwatres.2010.08.006
Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Davy P, Bolster D, Carrera J, de Dreuzy JR, Bour O (2011) Persistence
of incomplete mixing: A key to anomalous transport. Physical Review E 84(1,2), DOI
10.1103/PhysRevE.84.015301
Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Villermaux E (2013) Stretching, coalescence and mixing in porous
media. Physical Review Letters 110(20), DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.204501
Le Borgne T, Dentz M, Villermaux E (2015) The lamellar description of mixing in porous
media. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 770:458–498, DOI 10.1017/jfm.2015.117
Lejay A, Pichot G (????) Simulating diﬀusion processes in discontinuous media: Benchmark
tests. Journal of Computational Physics
Leray S, de Dreuzy JR, Aquilina L, Vergnaud-Ayraud V, Labasque T, Bour O, Le Borgne
T (2014) Temporal evolution of age data under transient pumping conditions. Journal of
Hydrology 511:555–566, DOI 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.01.064

--- PAGE 42 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 41
Liu H, Zhang Y, Zhou Q, Molz F (2007) An interpretation of potential scale dependence of
the eﬀective matrix diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 90(1-2):41–57,
DOI 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2006.09.006
Liu HH, Bodvarsson GS, Pan L (2000) Determination of particle transfer in random walk
particle methods for fractured porous media. Water Resources Research 36(3):707–713, DOI
10.1029/1999WR900323
Maier U, B¨ urger CM (2013) An accurate method for transient particle tracking. Water Re-
sources Research 49(5):3059–3063
Matheron G, de Marsily G (1980) Is transport in porous media always diﬀusive? A counterex-
ample. Water Resources Research 16(5):901–917, DOI 10.1029/WR016i005p00901
McCarthy JF (1990) Eﬀective permeability of sandstone-shale reservoirs by a random walk
method. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 23(9):L445
McCarthy JF (1991) Analytical models of the eﬀective permeability of sand-shale reservoirs.
Geophys J Int 105(2):513–527, DOI 10.1111/j.1365-246X.1991.tb06730.x
McCarthy JF (1993a) Continuous-time random walks on random media. Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and General 26(11):2495–2503, DOI 10.1088/0305-4470/26/11/004
McCarthy JF (1993b) Reservoir characterization : eﬃcient random-walk methods for upscaling
and image selection. SPE Asia Paciﬁc Oil and Gas Conference, 8-10 February, Singapore
25334
Metzler R, Klafter J (2000) The random walk’s guide to anomalous diﬀusion: a fractional
dynamics approach. Physics Reports 339(1):1–77, DOI 10.1016/S0370-1573(00)00070-3
Metzler R, Glockle WG, Nonnenmacher TF (1994) Fractional model equation for anoma-
lous diﬀusion. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 211(1):13–24, DOI
10.1016/0378-4371(94)90064-7
Metzler R, Jeon JH, Cherstvy AG, Barkai E (2014) Anomalous diﬀusion models and their prop-
erties: non-stationarity, non-ergodicity, and ageing at the centenary of single particle track-
ing. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 16(44):24,128–24,164, DOI 10.1039/c4cp03465a
Michalak AM, Kitanidis PK (2000) Macroscopic behavior and random-walk particle track-
ing of kinetically sorbing solutes. Water Resources Research 36(8):2133–2146, DOI
10.1029/2000WR900109
Monaghan JJ (2005) Smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Reports on Progress in Physics
68(8):1703–1759, DOI 10.1088/0034-4885/68/8/R01
Mos´ e R, Siegel P, Ackerer P, Chavent G (1994) Application of the mixed hybrid ﬁnite element
approximation in a groundwater model: Luxury or necessity? Water Resources Research
30(11):3001–3012, DOI 10.1029/94WR01786
Narasimhan TN, Pruess K (1988) MINC: An approach for analyzing transport in strongly
heterogeneous systems. In: Flow G, Modeling Q (eds) Springer Netherlands, 224, pp 375–
391
N´ eel MC, Rakotonasyl SH, Bauer D, Joelson M, Fleury M (2011) All order moments and
other functionals of the increments of some non-markovian processes. Journal of Statistical
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment DOI 10.1088/1742-5468/2011/02/P02006
N´ eel MC, Bauer D, Fleury M (2014) Model to interpret pulsed-ﬁeld-gradient NMR
data including memory and superdispersion eﬀects. Physical Review E 89(6), DOI
10.1103/PhysRevE.89.062121
Noetinger B (2013) An explicit formula for computing the sensitivity of the eﬀective con-
ductivity of heterogeneous composite materials to local inclusion transport properties and
geometry. SIAM Multiscale Modeling & Simulation 11(3):907–924, DOI 10.1137/120884961
Noetinger B (2015) A quasi steady state method for solving transient darcy ﬂow in complex
3D fractured networks accounting for matrix to fracture ﬂow. Journal of Computational
Physics 283:205–223, DOI 10.1016/j.jcp.2014.11.038
Noetinger B, Estebenet T (2000) Up-scaling of double porosity fractured media using
continuous-time random walks methods. Transport in Porous Media 39(3):315–337, DOI
10.1023/A:1006639025910
Noetinger B, Gautier Y (1998) Use of the Fourier-Laplace transform and of diagrammatical
methods to interpret pumping tests in heterogeneous reservoirs. Advances in Water Re-
sources 21(7):581–590
Noetinger B, Jarrige N (2012) A quasi steady state method for solving transient Darcy ﬂow
in complex 3D fractured networks. Journal of Computational Physics 231(1):23–38, DOI
10.1016/j.jcp.2011.08.015

--- PAGE 43 ---
42 Benoit Noetinger et al.
Noetinger B, Estebenet T, Landereau P (2001a) A direct determination of the transient ex-
change term of fractured media using a continuous time random walk method. Transport
in Porous Media 44(3):539–557, DOI 10.1023/A:1010647108341
Noetinger B, Estebenet T, Quintard M (2001b) Up scaling of fractured media: Equivalence
between the large scale averaging theory and the continuous time random walk method.
Transport in Porous Media 43(3):581–596, DOI 10.1023/A:1010733724498
Nœtinger B, Artus V, Ricard L (2004) Dynamics of the water-oil front for two-phase, immis-
cible ﬂow in heterogeneous porous media. 2-Isotropic media. Transport in Porous Media
56(3):305–328, DOI 10.1023/B:TIPM.0000026086.75908.ca
Nunes JP, Bijeljic B, Blunt MJ (2015) Time-of-ﬂight distributions and breakthrough curves in
heterogeneous porous media using a pore-scale streamline tracing algorithm. Transport in
Porous Media 109(2):317–336, DOI 10.1007/s11242-015-0520-y
O’Brien GS, Bean CJ, McDermott F (2003a) Numerical investigations of passive and reactive
ﬂow through generic single fractures with heterogeneous permeability. Earth and Planetary
Science Letters 213(3-4):271–284, DOI 10.1016/S0012-821X(03)00342-X
O’Brien GS, Bean CJ, McDermott F (2003b) A numerical study of passive transport through
fault zones. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 214(3-4):633–643, DOI 10.1016/S0012-
821X(03)00398-4
Odeh AS (1965) Unsteady-state behavior of naturally fractured reservoirs. SPE Journal
5(1):60–66, DOI 10.2118/966-PA
Oliver DS, Cunha LB, Reynolds AC (1997) Markov chain monte carlo methods for conditioning
a permeability ﬁeld to pressure data. Mathematical Geology 29(1):61–91
O’Shaughnessy B, Procaccia I (1985) Diﬀusion on fractals. Physical Review A 32(5):3073–3083,
DOI 10.1103/PhysRevA.32.3073
Ottino JM (1989) The kinematics of mixing: stretching, chaos and transport. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press
Painter S, Cvetkovic V (2005) Upscaling discrete fracture network simulations: An al-
ternative to continuum transport models. Water Resources Research 41(2), DOI
10.1029/2004WR003682
Painter S, Cvetkovic V, Mancillas J, Pensado O (2008) Time domain particle tracking methods
for simulating transport with retention and ﬁrst-order transformation. Water Resources
Research 44(1), DOI 10.1029/2007WR005944
Pan L, Bodvarsson GS (2002) Modeling transport in fractured porous media with the random-
walk particle method: The transient activity range and the particle transfer probability.
Water Resources Research 38(6), DOI 10.1029/2001WR000901
Park Y, de Dreuzy JR, Lee KK, Berkowitz B (2001) Transport and intersection mixing in
random fracture networks with power law length distributions. Water Resources Research
37(10):2493–2501, DOI 10.1029/2000WR000131
Park Y, Lee K, Kosakowski G, Berkowitz B (2003) Transport behavior in three-dimensional
fracture intersections. Water Resources Research 39(8), DOI 10.1029/2002WR001801
Pichot G, Erhel J, De Dreuzy JR (2010) A mixed hybrid mortar method for solv-
ing ﬂow in discrete fracture networks. Applicable Analysis 89(10):1629–1643, DOI
10.1080/00036811.2010.495333
Pollock DW (1988) Semianalytical computation of path lines for ﬁnite-diﬀerence models.
Ground Water 26(6):743–750, DOI 10.1111/j.1745-6584.1988.tb00425.x
Qu ZX, Liu ZF, Wang XH, Zhao P (2014) Finite analytic numerical method for solving two-
dimensional quasi-laplace equation. Numerical Methods for Partial Diﬀerential Equations
30(6):1755–1769, DOI 10.1002/num.21863
Quintard M, Whitaker S (1993) One- and two-equation models for transient diﬀusion pro-
cesses in two-phase systems. Advances in Heat Transfer 23:369–464, DOI 10.1016/S0065-
2717(08)70009-1
Redner S (1989) Transport due to random velocity ﬁelds. Physica D 38(1-3):287–290, DOI
10.1016/0167-2789(89)90207-8
Risken H (1996) The Fokker-Planck Equation. Springer Heidelberg New York
Rivard C, Delay F (2004) Simulations of solute transport in fractured porous media using 2D
percolation networks with uncorrelated hydraulic conductivity ﬁelds. Hydrogeology Journal
12(6):613–627, DOI 10.1007/s10040-004-0363-z
Roberts JE, Thomas JM (1991) Mixed and hybrid methods. In: Handbook of Numerical Anal-
ysis 2, Finite Element Methods -part 1, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland),
pp 523–639

--- PAGE 44 ---
Random walk methods for hydrodynamic transport from pore to reservoir scale 43
Robinet JC, Sardini P, Delay F, Hellmuth KH (2007) The eﬀect of rock matrix heterogeneities
near fracture walls on the residence time distribution (RTD) of solutes. Transport in Porous
Media 72(3):393–408, DOI 10.1007/s11242-007-9159-7
Romary T (2009) Integrating production data under uncertainty by parallel interacting markov
chains on a reduced dimensional space. Computational Geosciences 13(1):103–122
Romeu RK, Noetinger B (1995) Calculation of internodal transmissivities in ﬁnite diﬀerence
models of ﬂow in heterogeneous porous media. Water Resources Research 31(4):943–959,
DOI 10.1029/94WR02422
Roubinet D, Irving J (2014) Discrete-dual-porosity model for electric current ﬂow in
fractured rock. Journal of Geophysical Research-Solid Earth 119(2):767–786, DOI
10.1002/2013JB010668
Roubinet D, Liu HH, de Dreuzy JR (2010) A new particle-tracking approach to simulating
transport in heterogeneous fractured porous media. Water Resources Research 46(11), DOI
10.1029/2010WR009371
Roubinet D, de Dreuzy JR, Tartakovsky DM (2013) Particle-tracking simulations of anomalous
transport in hierarchically fractured rocks. Computers & Geosciences 50(SI):52–58, DOI
10.1016/j.cageo.2012.07.032
Russian A, Dentz M, Gouze P (2016) Time domain random walks for hydrodynamic transport
in heterogeneous media. Water Resources Research, under review
Saﬀman PG, Taylor G (1958) The penetration of a ﬂuid into a porous medium or hele-shaw
cell containing a more viscous liquid. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, The Royal Society, vol 245, pp 312–329
Sahimi M (2011) Flow and transport in porous media and fractured rock: from classical meth-
ods to modern approaches. John Wiley & Sons
Salamon P, Fern` andez-Garcia D, G´ omez-Hern´ andez JJ (2006a) A review and numerical as-
sessment of the random walk particle tracking method. Journal of contaminant hydrology
87(3):277–305
Salamon P, Fernandez-Garcia D, Gomez-Hernandez JJ (2006b) A review and numerical as-
sessment of the random walk particle tracking method. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology
87(3-4):277–305, DOI 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2006.05.005
Salles J, Thovert JF, Delannay R, Prevors L, Auriault JL, Adler P (1993) Taylor dispersion in
porous media. determination of the dispersion tensor. Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics
(1989-1993) 5(10):2348–2376
Scher H, Lax M (1973a) Stochastic transport in a disordered solid. I. Theory. Physical Review
B 7(10):4491–4502, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevB.7.4491
Scher H, Lax M (1973b) Stochastic transport in a disordered solid. II. Impurity conduction.
Physical Review B 7(10):4502–4519, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevB.7.4502
Scher H, Margolin G, Berkowitz B (2002a) Towards a uniﬁed framework for anomalous
transport in heterogeneous media. Chemical Physics 284(1-2):349–359, DOI 10.1016/S0301-
0104(02)00558-X
Scher H, Margolin G, Metzler R, Klafter J, Berkowitz B (2002b) The dynamical foundation of
fractal stream chemistry: The origin of extremely long retention times. Geophysical Research
Letters 29(5), DOI 10.1029/2001GL014123
Semra K, Ackerer P, Mos´ e R (1993) Three dimensional groundwater quality modeling in hetero-
geneous media. In: Water pollution II: Modeling, measuring and prediction, Computational
Mechanics Publications, Southampton, UK, pp 3–11
Sen P (2003) Time-dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient as a probe of permeability of the pore-wall.
Journal of Chemical Physics 119(18):9871–9876, DOI 10.1063/1.1611477
Sen P (2004) Time-dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient as a probe of geometry. Concepts in Magnetic
Resonance Part A 23A(1):1–21, DOI 10.1002/cmr.a.20017
Sen P, Schwartz L, Mitra P, Halperin B (1994) Surface relaxation and the long-time diﬀusion
coeﬃcient in porous media: Periodic geometries. Physical Review B 49(1):215–225, DOI
10.1103/PhysRevB.49.215
de Simoni M, Carrera J, Sanchez-Vila X, Guadagnini A (2005) A procedure for the solution
of multicomponent reactive transport problems. Water Resources Research 41(11), DOI
10.1029/2005WR004056
Srinivasan G, Tartakosky DM, Dentz M, Viswanathan H, Berkowitz B, Robinson BA (2010)
Random walk particle tracking simulations of non-ﬁckian transport in heterogeneous media.
Journal of Computational Physics 229(11):4304–4314, DOI 10.1016/j.jcp.2010.02.014

--- PAGE 45 ---
44 Benoit Noetinger et al.
Sun NZ (1999) A ﬁnite cell method for simulating the mass transport process in porous media.
Water Resources Research 35(12):3649–3662, DOI 10.1029/1999WR900187
Sun NZ (2002) Modeling biodegradation processes in porous media by the ﬁnite cell method.
Water Resources Research 38:3, DOI 10.1029/2000WR000198
de Swaan A (1976) Analytic solutions for determining naturally fractured reservoir properties
by well testing. SPE J 16(3):117–22
de Swann A, Ramirez-Villa M (1993) Functions of ﬂow from porous rock blocks. Journal of
Petroleum Science and Engineering 9(1):39–48, DOI 10.1016/0920-4105(93)90027-C
Tallakstad KT, Knudsen HA, Ramstad T, Lovoll G, Maloy KJ, Toussaint R, Flekkoy EG
(2009) Steady-state two-phase ﬂow in porous media: statistics and transport properties.
Physical Review Letters 102(7), DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.074502
Tang C (1985) Diﬀusion-limited aggregation and the Saﬀman-Taylor problem. Physical Review
A 31(3):1977–1979, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevA.31.1977
Tang DH, Frind EO, Sudicky EA (1981) Contaminant transport in fractured porous media:
Analytical solution for a single fracture. Water Resources Research 17(3):555–564, DOI
10.1029/WR017i003p00555
Tartakovsky AM, Meakin P (2006) Pore scale modeling of immiscible and miscible ﬂuid ﬂows
using smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Advances in Water Resources 29(10):1464–1478,
DOI 10.1016/j.advwatres.2005.11.014
Taylor GI (1954) Diﬀusion and mass transport in tubes. Proceedings of the Physical Society
Section B 67(420):857–869, DOI 10.1088/0370-1301/67/12/301
Teodorovich E, Spesivtsev P, Nœtinger B (2011) A stochastic approach to the two-phase
displacement problem in heterogeneous porous media. Transport in Porous Media 87(1):151–
177, DOI 10.1007/s11242-010-9673-x
Tompson AFB, Gelhar LW (1990) Numerical simulation of solute transport in
three-dimensional, randomly heterogeneous porous media. Water Resources Research
26(10):2541–2562, DOI 10.1029/WR026i010p02541
Uﬃnk GJM (1985) A random walk method for the simulation of macrodispersion in a stratiﬁed
aquifer. In: 18th Gen. Assembly Proc. Symp., IAHS Publ. 146, IAHS, Wallingford, UK.,
Hamburg, Germany
Wang YF, Liu ZF, Wang XH (2014) Finite analytic numerical method for three-dimensional
ﬂuid ﬂow in heterogeneous porous media. Journal of Computational Physics 278:169–181,
DOI 10.1016/j.jcp.2014.08.026
Warren JE, Root PJ (1963) The behavior of naturally fractured reservoirs. The Society of
Petroleum Engineers Journal 3(3):245–255
Wen XH, Gomez-Hernandez JJ (1996) The constant displacement scheme for tracking
particles in heterogeneous aquifers. Ground Water 34(1):135–142, DOI 10.1111/j.1745-
6584.1996.tb01873.x
Willmann M, Carrera J, Snchez-Vila X (2008) Transport upscaling in heterogeneous aquifers:
What physical parameters control memory functions? Water Resources Research 44:12,
DOI 10.1029/2007WR006531
Witten TA, Sander LM (1983) Diﬀusion-limited aggregation. Physical Review B 27(9):5686–
5697, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevB.27.5686
Zheng C, Bennett GD (2002) Applied contaminant transport modeling, 2nd edn. 440 pp, Wiley
Interscience
Zimmermann S, Koumoutsakos P, Kinzelbach W (2001) Simulation of pollutant trans-
port using a particle method. Journal of Computational Physics 173(1):322–347, DOI
10.1006/jcph.2001.6879
View publication statsView publication stats