--- PAGE 1 ---
THE LOG ANALYST, VOL 40, NO. 4 (JULY-AUGUST 1999). P. 2bC-270. I I FIGURES 
Forward Models for Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance in Carbonate Rocks 
T. S. Ramakrishnan, L. M. Schwartz, E. J. Fordham, W. E. Kenyon, and D. J. Wilkinson] 
ABSTRACT 
In the conventional approach to the interpretation of 
nuclear tnagnetic resonance (NMR) measurements on 
water-saturated reservoir rocks, it is assumed that the T, 
distribution and the pore size distribution are directly re- 
lated. However, both laboratory and log data show that 
this relationship breaks down in many pore systems, es- 
pecially carbonates, which consist of tnicro (,intragranu- 
lar) and macro (intergranular) porosity. This breakdown 
limits our ability to predict permeability and movable 
fluid fractions. Physically, it is due to the diffusion of 
magnetization between the intra- and intergranular 
pores. 
We present here three geometrical models that help 
clarify the relationship between NMR measurements 
and the underlying pore geometry. All of the models 
characterize this geometry in terms of four parameters: 
(1) the volume fraction of total porosity, $ 
(2) the volume fraction of intergranular porosity, fm 
(3) the pore volume to surface area ratio for the niicro- 
pores, VS,, 
(4) the pore volume to surface area ratio for the niacro- 
pores, Vsni 
In the first model, we apply random walk numerical 
simulations to an ordered cubic packing of consolidated 
microporous grains. For given values of the above pa- 
rameters, the Tz distribution is evaluated as a function of 
surface relaxation parameter, p. In the second and third 
models, the microporous grains are treated as a contin- 
uum. For thep values of greatest interest, roughly, 1.50 
+ 7.50pm/s, essentially identical results can be derived 
from a three-dimensional (3D) analytical model. In ad- 
dition, for all values ofp, many features of the T, distri- 
bution can be represented in terms of a one-dimensional 
(1 D) model pore space. 
INTRODUCTION 
Conventional interpretation of NMR relaxation in 
water-saturated reservoir rocks is based on two assump- 
tions. The first is that the magnetization relaxation within 
each pore is controlled by surface relaxivity so that the ef- 
fective lifetime is V, lp. Here V, is the volume to surface 
area ratio ofthe individual pore andp is the surface relaxiv- 
ity parameter. The net transverse relaxation rate for that 
pore is then 
(1) 
where the second tertn on the right side represents a small 
correction associated with the bulk lifetime, T2B, of the 
fluid. Second. in the rock as a whole, each pore is assumed 
to act independently so that the measured magnetization is 
simply a sum of contributions from the individual pores 
(Kenyon et al., 1989. Kenyon, 1992, Kenyon, 1997). In 
this scenario, it follows that the T, and pore size distribu- 
tions are directly related. In carbonates, especially in grain- 
stones and packstones, experiments perfomed at our 
laboratory indicate that these assumptions often fail. The 
purpose of this paper is to show that this failure can be un- 
derstood in terms of the diffusion of water molecules be- 
tween the inter- and intragranular pores. To illustrate, we 
Manuscript received by the Editor February 22, 1999; revised manuscript received May 3, 1999, 
' Schlumberger-Doll Research, Ridgefield, CT 06877-4 108, USA 
01999 Society of Professional Well Log Analysts. All rights reserved. 
260 The Log Analyst 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 2 ---
Forward Models for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in Carbonate Rocks 
consider 111 rigures 1 and 2 two examples of Middle East 
carbonates. In the left-hand panel of Figure 1 we have an 
image of a peloidal grainstone obtained fiom an optical 
thin section. The right-hand panel shows an environmental 
scanning electron microscope (ESEM) image of the inte- 
rior of what appear as dark solid grains in the left-hand op- 
tical image. Clearly, the large grains are comprised of 
roughly micron sized pellets and the rock‘s porosity is di- 
vided between two populations with very different length 
1 L‘ 
$4 
scales. Similar behaviour is seen in Figure 2 where two 
ESEM images of a different Middle Eastern carbonate are 
shown (Anselmetti et al., 1998). Here the left-hand panel 
shows both large textured grains and intergranular porosity 
while the right-hand panel illustrates the fine grained char- 
acter found in the large grains. Despite the fact that these 
pore spaces involve widely separated length scales, we see 
in Figure 3 that the T, spectrum measured on the sample 
shown in Figure 1 has only a single peak. Clearly, in this 
FIG. 1. The left-hand panel is an optical micrograph of a peloidal grainstone with grains that are roughly 200pm in diameter. 
Here the white objects are recrystalized calcite grains, the dark objects are microporous grains and the intergranular pores are 
filled with blue expoxy. The right-hand panel is an environmental scanning electron micrograph (ESEM) image taken from the 
same sample. The fine structure within what appear to be dark solid grains (on the left) is typical of many carbonate grainstones. 
: 
FIG. 2. The left-hand panel is an ESEM image of a peloidal grainsTone with a 200 pm scale bar at its bottom. The right-hand 
ESEM image is from a mudstone sample and the scale bar now represents 30pm. The fine structure in the mudstone is quite simi- 
lar to the features within the microporous calcite grains shown on the left. 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 3 ---
Schwartz ct al. 
case the direct link between T, and pore size is lost. This 
may be the reason that carbonate T, spectra have been unre- 
liable for estimating both permeability and bound fluid vol- 
ume. 
In the following sections we will develop three models 
that lead to a common understanding of NMR measure- 
ments in water-saturated carbonates with inter- and intra- 
granular porosity. From the outset we picture the 
homogeneous rock fabric as having three subvolumes: 
grains, intergranular pores and vugs, with volume fractions 
J,, Jm and Sv, respectively. The grains themselves have po- 
rosity (Pk, so the total porosity, @, is given by 
@ = Sv + Sm + @pSg > (2) 
l=SV+Sm+S,. (3) 
where 
Vugs are associated with grains that have been dissolved 
away from the original granular network. Their size can 
vary from that of a single grain (roughly, 100 pm) to centi- 
meters. Water in vugs contributes to the rock’s NMR signal 
at the bulk fluid rate. Their influence will not be treated ex- 
plicitly here; if the vug porosity is known a priori, a correc- 
tion to ourforward models is easily made. (By contrast, if 
we are concerned with the inverse problem, the vug contri- 
bution to the magnetization decay spectrum can be readily 
identified only if J, << Sm + @J’,.) We will also discuss, 
briefly, the effects of oil in the pore space, within the 
framework of a rock that remains water wet. 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS 
The purpose of numerical simulations is to provide re- 
sults that mimic as closely as possible the physical pro- 
cesses underlying NMR measurements on rocks. They are 
valuable because (1) they help clarify the basic mecha- 
nisms operating within a specified pore geometry and (2) 
they provide the benchmark for the analytical models to be 
discussed in the following sections. The analytical models 
are computationally much less demanding, and can thus be 
employed for the inversion of both laboratory and field 
data. The geometry for the numerical simulations (Figure 
4) is based on a simple cubic grain consolidation model 
(Schwartz, 1990) in which each of the large grains com- 
prises smaller, consolidated, grains whose centers lie on a 
commensurate sublattice. This model is defined by four 
geometrical parameters: the radii R, and rg of the large and 
the small spheres (which determine the porosity contribu- 
tion from inter- and intragranular pores) and the lengths, A, 
and us, of the large and small unit cells. Within the normal 
range of R, and rg, both pore types will form connected 
pathways. 
To study the NMR properties of this geometric model, 
we have carried out numerical simulations based on ran- 
dom walk techniques. In conventional random walk simu- 
lations (Bergman, et al., 1995), diffusing particles are 
randomly placed in the pore space and take steps of a fixed 
size, E. With each step, the clock advances by a fixed time, 
E,/ (60& where Do is the diffusion coefficient for bulk wa- 
15 
FIG. 3. T2 distribution measured on a plug taken from a sam- 
ple similar to the one shown in Figure 1. For this sample the 
NMR and bouyancy porosities are 24.7 and 25.4 P.u., respec- 
tively. 
Pore Section Throat Section 
FIG. 4. Three-dimensional model based on a periodic pack- 
ing of consolidated microporous grains. 
262 The Log Analyst July-AuguSt 1999 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 4 ---
Forward Models for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in Carbonate Rocks 
ter. In the present case, however, such simulations are not 
practical. Because E must be chosen to be much smaller 
than the smallest features in the pore space (i.e., the throats 
in the microporous grains) the description of diffusion in 
the large intergranular pores is prohibitively inefficient. 
Accordingly, we have adapted the first arrival tech- 
niques employed by Torquato and Kim (1989). In this 
method, at each step one draws the largest possible sphere 
within the pore space centered at the walker’s current posi- 
tion. The walker then jumps to a randomly chosen point on 
the sphere’s surface and the clock is advanced by an 
amount related to the jump distance. Since we are dealing 
with diffusion in free space, the distribution of allowed 
times for a first arrival to the surface of a sphere of radius R 
&an be obtained analytically. In terms of the dimensionless 
we denote this distribution as 
I 
-1 .. 
FIG. 5. T2 distributions are shown for five values of the relaxa- 
tion parameter, p. In the left panel the inter- and intragranular 
porosity are isolated while in the right panel diffusion between 
the two parts of the pore space is allowed. 
f(x). cf(x) will be peaked at roughly x = 116.) It can then be 
shown that 
where the series expansions in the second and third lines of 
this equation are to be used for small and large values of x, 
respectively. This process continues until the walker 
reaches a thin layer of width, say, 3~ from the pore grain in- 
terface, at which point we revert to the standard random 
walk algorithm with fixed steps of length E. If one of these 
steps takes the walker into the grain, the walk ends with 
probability y. When the walk ends, the net time associated 
with the random walk is entered into a histogram fiom 
which one derives the final magnetization versus time 
curve. The relation between y and the macroscopic relaxiv- 
ity parameterp isp = 3y D01(2&) (Bergman et al., 1995). 
T2 distributions obtained from our simulations are illus- 
trated in Figure 5. Here we have taken A, = 80 pm, a, = 2 
pm, and 2RglAg = 1.23 = 2rgfar These values of Rg and rg 
lead to a total porosity, t$ = 0.3 1, which is divided between 
microporosity, t$J, = 0.17, and intergranular porosity, f,,, 
= 0.14. In the right-hand panel, the computed T2 distribu- 
tions are shown for five values of p ranging between 1.50 
pmls and 937.5 pmls. In the left-hand panel the corre- 
sponding results are shown for simulations in which diffu- 
sion between the intra- and intergranular pore is forbidden. 
It should be emphasized that only the two smallest val- 
ues ofp employed in Figure 5 are thought to be representa- 
tive of reservoir carbonates. Results with larger p values 
are shown to illustrate the physical processes at work. The 
horizontal axis ispT2 which can be thought of as an effec- 
tive pore size. In both panels, beginning with the shortest 
times, we have shaded the porosity fiaction associated with 
the microporosity. Note that on the left-hand side the two 
pore populations remain essentially unchanged as the value 
ofp decreases so that the T2 distribution does, in fact, give 
an accurate representation of the pore size distribution. By 
contrast, on the right-hand side, the results are quite differ- 
ent and, as the values ofp decrease toward the range of ex- 
perimental interest, two important trends are evident. 
First, the area under the short time peak gradually de- 
creases and second, the position of the upper peak shifts to- 
ward shorter times. Acting together, these two effects tend 
to merge the two peaks and produce a T2 distribution that 
bears little resemblance to the original pore size distribu- 
JQ-AwSt 1999 2f3 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 5 ---
Schwartz et al. 
L 1 
I 
PT, m) 
Fi6.6. T2 distributions are shown (for the same five p values 
used in ngure 5) for a model with @ = 0.25, fm = 0.05, and @Jg 
= 0.m. 
tion. Physically, the origin of these effects is diffusion of 
water molecules between the micro- and qaacropores. Ifthe 
ough, molecules originally in the mi- 
into the macropores before their nu- 
clear spins relax. The decay of these spins then proceeds 
much more slowly and they contribute to the late time 
peak. This explains the apparent transfer of weight from 
the early time to the late time peaks. Similarly, molecules 
originally in the large pores can diffuse into the micropores 
where they are exposed to an enormous surface compared 
to the case of a solid grain. This excess surface area leads to 
increased relaxation rates and thus shifts the position of the 
late time peak to earlier times. 
shown for a system with the same 
values of A, and ug but with RJAg = 1.30 and 
give (B = 0.25, @Jg = 0.20, and fm = 0.05. These parameters 
were typical of many Middle East carbonates examined in 
our laboratory. Here, for thep values of experimental inter- 
est, the two peaks have merged into a single peak that is 
quite similar to the results shown in 
ed above We emphasize that the diffusion e 
are strongly affected by the presence on of hy- 
drocarbon in the pore space. To illustrate this point, con- 
sider a very simple periodic model in which oil blobs are 
centerd in the intergranular pores (Figure 7, left panel). We 
assume that the micropores remain water filled (so that the 
rock is water-wet) and that the oil drop begins as a sphere 
which grows as S, decreases. The oil drop 
cal until it first touches the grain and then 
Figure 7, so as to not invade the microporous region. In the 
right-hand panel of Figure 7 we return to the parameters 
employed in Figure 5. Because the system is water wet, the 
hydrocarbon component of the NMR signal is identical to 
In Figure 6 resu 
FIG. 7. Distribution of oil blobs (shaded) in the intergranular pores of the model shown in Figure 4. We are looking at a slice 
through a unit cell ceneterd at the corner of, and oriented at 45" relative to the cell shown in Figure 4. In the right-hand panel the T2 
distributions for four values of S, are shown. The smallest value of S, corresponds to the filling of the intergranular pores with oil. 
The Log Analyst 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 6 ---
that of bulk oil. It is represented here as a peak centered at 
T2 = Is, which is appropriate for a light oil. For S, = 0.55 
the entire macropore is filled with oil and diffusion be- 
tween the micro- and macropores is completely sup- 
pressed. The T2 distribution then separates into two 
well-defined peaks corresponding to oil and water. For 
0.55 I S, 5 0.66 the shape of the oil blob is as shown in 
Figure 7. For S, 1 0.66, the area under the oil peak de- 
creases and the part of the distribution associated with wa- 
ter molecules regains the structure associated with 
coupling between inter- and intragranular pores. 
ANALYTICAL MODELS 
General Equations 
In Figure 8 we depict, schematically, the structure of 
two simpler models that capture the physical picture devel- 
oped in the preceding section. Here we envision either a 3D 
array of spherical microporous grains each of which is sur- 
rounded by intergranular pore space or a 1D periodic ar- 
rangement of identical slab-like microporous grains 
separated by intergranular pores. 
The central equations that describe these two models are. 
identical. Within the intergranular pore, the magnetization, 
M,,,, is subject to the usual difksion equation: 
Mm - aMm 
T2B at . DoV2Mm - - - - (5) 
The microporous grains are treated as a continuum with 
local magnetization per unit volume of pore space, A,Q In 
contrast to the model of Figure 4, no attempt is made here 
to represent the actual structure of the microporosity. In- 
stead, this structure enters through the local porosity, @, 
and the electrical formation factor, F,, of the microporous 
.. ../------ -. 
Forward Models for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in Carbonate Rocks 
July-August 1999 The Log Analyst 265 
FIG. 8. Three-dimensional (upper panel) and one- 
dimensional (lower panel) geometries underlying our analyti- 
cal models. 
continuum. Enhanced relaxation at the interface within the 
microporous grain is represented in terms of the decay rate 
llT2,, = plVs,, where Vs, is the pore-volume-to-surface- 
area ratio within the microporous grain. Within the micro- 
porous grain, M, obeys the modified diffusion equation 
What are the boundary conditions to be applied at the in- 
terface between the macro- and micropores? First, there is 
the simple continuity condition, Mm = M,. We must also 
match the flux from the macropore into the wall with (1) 
the flux away from the wall in the microporous grain and 
(2) a surface demagnetization rate dependent on a local sur- 
face relaxivity p: 
Don.VM, =-n.VM, DO +pMnI(1-@,) (7) 
FP 
where n is the unit normal vector pointing out of the grain. 
Note that if we let @, + 0, equation (7) reduces to 
Don - VM,, = pM,, and we recover the problem studied by 
Brownstein and Tarr (1979). The final boundary condition 
is the periodicity of M,,, across the faces of the unit cell. 
Equations (5) through (7) determine the behavior of the 
two models defined in Figure 8. The solution to these equa- 
tions can be obtained in a variety of ways, for example, by 
an extension of standard eigenfunction methods or by 
Laplace transforms. The computational advantage of one 
method over the other depends on the specific details of the 
problem. Both models are defined by the same four geo- 
metrical parameters introduced in connection with Figure 
4. For example, in the 1D case, the intergranular porosity is 
given by fm = LIW and the average microporosity of the 
system is f, = @,fg = @,( 1 - fm). The pore volume to sur- 
face area ratio for the intergranular pore, Vs,,,, is simply L 
while that for the microporous grain ispT2,. While the 3D 
model might appear to have an additional curvature pa- 
rameter, Rg, this model is in fact fully defined by @, fm, Vsm, 
and Tw. For both models, the physical parameters Do, TZs, 
and F, must be estimated independently. 
Apparent Relaxivity 
The boundary condition of equation (7) allows us to in- 
troduce the concept of apparent relaxivity, po at the inter- 
face between the intergranuar pore and the microporous 
grain. Suppose we assume that the magnetization near the 
surface of the microporous grain varies on a time scale 
much larger than T2,. The transient term in equation (6) can 
then be ignored to yield a quasistatic description of M,, and 
pN can be defined by writing the boundary condition (7) as 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 7 ---
Schwartz et al. 
Dun.VM,,, =-n.VhI,, Do +pM,,,(l-@l,)~ p,hl,,, . (8) 
5, 
Solving the quasistatic equations, the formulas for pLI in 
one and three dimensions are: 
ply related to the porosity fractions as in equation ( 12). In 
practice, we find that the two-exponential fit over- 
estimates the value off,,,. For the 1D model, an explicit, but 
approximate, correction is given in equation ( 16). 
On the other hand, for intermediate values ofp, when 
where L, I FV- L represents a one-dimensional "grain ra- 
dius," and 
(10) 
Substituting typical numbers for reservoir grainstones and 
packstones (Do = 2.5 (pm)'/rns. @/i = 0.20, F,, = 25.0, R, = 
100 pm, and p = 1.5 pmls), we find (1) that the diffusion 
length within the microporous grain, 
JmZim 
is much smaller than the grain diameter (so that the pene- 
tration of M,,, into the microporous grain is essentially a 
surface effect) and (2) that equations (9) and (1 0) reduce to 
Note that the microscopic paraineter,p, does not appear ex- 
plicitly in equation (1 1); it enters only through the relaxa- 
tion time, T2,(, a quantity that can, in principle, be measured 
directly. With the numbers given above, we find that the 
value ofp, can easily be an order of magnitude larger than 
the intrinsic p value. 
The above equation for pi, immediately suggests an ap- 
proximate two-exponential fit to the relaxation data 
Here Vs,,l is the ratio of the macropore volume to the exter- 
nal surface area of the microporous grain. We emphasize 
that equation (1 2) suffers from two important drawbacks. 
First, because p, is generally much larger than p, the time 
scale for macropore relaxation is not significantly different 
from TZp and the quasistatic approximation is not justified. 
Second, when the diffusion length in the microporous grain 
is not small, a significant amount of magnetization can leak 
from the microporous grain to the intergranular pore. The 
amplitudes of the dominant decay modes are then riot sim- 
the two-exponential approximation is more realistic. As p 
decreases, however, some of the microporosity leaks into 
the intergranular pore and this picture breaks down. Mathe- 
matically, this breakdown arises because the two- 
exponential approximation does not satisfy the boundary 
condition (8). Thus. while the quasistatic approximation 
explains the enhanced relaxivity of the intergranular pores. 
it is inadequate for thep values of interest in reservoir car- 
bonates. 
One-dimensional analytical results 
Without any additional approximations, the equations 
developed above can be solved by introducing a Laplace 
transform ofhI(t) to M(s) 
M(s) = M(t)e-"dt. (13! 
Once M(s) has been evaluated, inversion back to A4(t) can 
be carried out either numerically or using contour integra- 
tion. The time-dependent magnetization is evaluated from 
the residue theorem: 
lum 
m 
where (s,) are the simple poles of M(s) in the complex s- 
plane. M(t) is thus a sum of discrete exponential decays 
with amplitudes that may be evaluated from equation (14). 
To each mode rate there corresponds a shape; these can be 
used to compute explicit magnetization profiles through 
the pore and grain, at various stages of the decay. 
Typical results obtained for this model are illustrated in 
Figure 9. Here we have taken p = 1 SO pds, and fixed the 
geometrical parameters to match the system described in 
Figure 6. In Figure 9a we see that the M(t) curves calcu- 
lated from the one-dimensional model and the three- 
dimensional random walk simulations are essentially iden- 
tical. In Figure 9b, for five different times, (t = 0, T,,/2, T2p, 
To, and 2T0) the magnetization is shown as function ofposi- 
tion in the one-dimensional unit half cell. (To is defined in 
equation ( 19.) Here we see that the intergranular pore ex- 
hibits fast diffusion behavior (i.e., spatially uniform mag- 
netization) while the microporous grain shows a clear 
magnetization gradient. Physically, this gradient repre- 
sents the replenishing of magnetization within the grain via 
266 The Log Analyst July-AuguSt 1999 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 8 ---
Forward Models for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in Carbonate Rocks 
the diffusive entry of water molecules coming from the in- 
terwular pore. In Fi 
ma1 mode solution i 
determine ly by the input geometry, is represented by 
1 
.I 
0 
10' 102 1 o3 
time tlms 
loo 
two sticks ending with boxes, whose height gives the am- 
plitude of the corresponding mode. The coupled case is 
dramatically different. Here the modes are shown as sticks 
ending with circles and the enhanced relaxivity of the mi- 
croporous grain acting on the magnetization in the inter- 
granular pore has shifted the corresponding mode to much 
earlier times. In addition, we see the spillover effect (i.e., 
penetration of magnetization from the intergranular mode 
into the grain) which markedly increases the amplitude of 
the pore mode. In Figure 10 the one dimensional normal 
mode results are compared directly with the T2 distribu- 
tions from Figure 6. The level of qualitative agreement is 
quite satisfying. 
Some simple approximations help in understanding 
these results. In many typical cases the decay is dominated 
by just two or three exponential decay modes. There is usu- 
ally a single pore-like mode, which arises mainly from the 
intergranular pore, and which penetrates exponentially into 
the grain. Its relaxation rate, l/To, is given approximately 
bY 
"0 10 20 a 
Position in unit half cell x IW 
lo-' 1 oo 
Apparent pore size p7; I pm 
FIG. 9. Results for the one-dimensional analytical model with 
parameters chosen to correspond to those of Figure 6. In 
panel (a) the magnetization, M(f), is compared with the results 
obtained from the random walk simulation. In (b) the spatial 
dependence of the magnetization is shown for five values off 
(see text). W = 73.5 pm, so that only a fraction of the grain is 
shown.) In panel (c) the location of the normal modes is dis- 
played with the uncoupled and coupled modes shown in blue 
and red, respectively. 
......... ......... ......... 
10 - 
m 
... 0 
J ___ 
I 1 
FIG. 10. Modal analysis from the 1 D coupled diffusion model 
(red) compared with the T, distributions shown in Figure 6 
(green). 
267 The Log Analyst 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 9 ---
Schwartz et al. 
Here we see that the rate assigned to this mode is controlled 
by the apparent rekvity, pn, origmally defined in connection 
with equation (9). Its intensity lo is shifted from f, to 
(16) 
where 
Because of the strength of the diffusive coupling in shifting 
To from the intrinsic value, Llp, towards T*, Xis not nec- 
essarily small. The rest of the decay is often dominated by 
one or two "grain-like" modes, shifted by small amounts 
away from Tw. The practical consequence is that fre- 
quently the magnetization can be approximated as a bi- or 
tri-exponential decay. However, the rates and intensities of 
such modes are related in a complicated and nonlinear way 
1.0, I 
0.8 
0.6 
m 
z 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
lo' Id 
ms 
d 4- ' """ 1 
5 
lo] 0 0.1 1 
FIG. 11. In the upper panel a comparison of the magnetiza- 
tion calculated from the 3D analytical model with the corre- 
sponding results obtained from numerical simulation. Here, as 
in Figure 9, the geometrical parameters are chosen as in Fig- 
ure 6. In the lower panel the corresponding normal modes are 
shown. These results are very similar to their one-dimensional 
counterparts shown in Figure 9c. 
to the main parameters of the model, such as the porosity 
partitions fm and @,, and the length scales L andpTw. We 
emphasize again that approximations like equation (12) are 
generally not valid for the analysis of carbonate Nh4R data. 
Three-dimensional analytical results 
To keep the analysis of the 3D model tractable, we limit 
our attention to values ofp that are small enough to guaran- 
tee that the magnetization in the intergranular pore remains 
uniform. (This was seen quite clearly in Figure 9b, for the 
one dimensional model.) As long as pJ( Vsm Do) << 1, the 
spatial gradients in Mm are negligible, and the actual shape 
of the intergranular pore is irrelevant. Within this frame- 
work, in addition to equation (5), the magnetization in the 
intergranular pore, M,, is described by 
DO 
F, 
= -n-VM, (R,) + pM, (1 -@, ) . (17) 
Once the profile for Mp is obtained at a given time, its 
value at Y = Rg gives Mm (from equation (17)). The integral 
of M, over the volume of the spherical grain then gives the 
contribution from the grain. Results for the magnetization 
calculated from this model are compared with numerical 
simulation data in the upper panel of Figure 11. In the 
lower panel of this figure the underlying normal mode 
spectrum is shown. Here the geometry is taken to be the 
same as in Figure 6 and the agreement between the analytic 
and simulation results is excellent. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A family of geometrical models has been developed to 
describe magnetization decay in carbonates with mixed 
micro- and intergranular porosity. These models resolve 
the apparent contradiction between the pore structure and 
the measured T2 distribution. In addition, the analytic mod- 
els provide a basis for the inversion of laboratory and field 
NMR measurements. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge important conversa- 
tions with F. Anselmetti, G. Eberli, C. Flaum, B. Halperin, M. 
Herron, D. Johnson, S. Luthi, A. Matteson, and A. Rabaute. We 
are especially grateful to Drs. Anselmetti, Luthi, and Eberli for 
permission to reproduce figures from their paper. 
REFERENCES 
Anselmetti, F. S., Luthi, S. M., and Eberli, G. P., 1998, Quantita- 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 10 ---
Forward Models for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in Carbonate Rocks 
tive characterization of carbonate pore systems by digital im- 
age analysis, AAPG Bulletin, v. 82, no. 10, pp. 1815-36. 
Bergman, D. J., Dunn, K.-J., Schwartz, L., and Mitra, P., 1995, 
Self-diffusion in a periodic porous medium: A comparison of 
different approaches, Physical Review E, v. 51, pp. 
Brownstein, K. R. and Tarr, C. E., 1979, Importance of classical 
diffusion in NMR studies of water in biological cells, Physical 
Review A, v. 19, no. 6, pp. 2446-2453. 
Kenyon, W. E., Howard, J. J., Sezginer, A., Straley, C., Matteson, 
A., Horkowitz, K., and Ehrlich, R., 1989, Pore size distribu- 
tion and NMR in microporous cherty sandstones, paper LL, in 
30th Annual Logging Symposium Transactions: Society of 
Professional Well Log Analysts, 24 p. 
Kenyon, W. E., 1992, Nuclear magnetic resonance as a petro- 
physical measurement, Nuclear Geophysics, v. 6, no. 2, pp. 
Kenyon, W. E., 1997, Petrophysical principles of applications of 
NMR logging, The Log Analyst, v. 38, no. 2, p. 21-43. 
Schwartz, L., 1990, Modeling transport in granular porous media, 
paper Y, in 3 1 st Annual Logging Symposium Transactions: 
Society of Professional Well Log Analyst, 23 p. 
Torquato, S. and Kim, I. C., 1989, Efficient simulation technique 
to compute effective properties of heterogeneous media, Ap- 
pliedPhysics Letters, v. 55, no. 18, pp. 1847-49. 
3393-3400. 
153-171. 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
T. S. Ramakrishnan has a BS degree in chemical engineering 
from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi and a PhD degree 
from the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago. He is a scienti- 
fic advisor working at Schlumberger-Doll Research, Ridgefield, 
Connecticut. He is an editor for Society ofPetroleum Engineers J. 
His research interests include the theoretical and experimental as- 
pects of flow in porous media and rock physics. (ramaaridge- 
field. sdr. slb.com) 
Lawrence M. Schwartz recieved his PhD degree in physics 
from Harvard University in 1970. He was a postdoctoral research 
associate at Harvard from 1970 to 1972 when he joined the Phys- 
ics Department at Brandeis University. While at Brandeis he 
studied the electronic properties of disordered metals and metal- 
lic compounds. In 1982 he joined Schlumberger-Doll Research 
where he is now a scientific advisor. His research deals with the 
interplay between the geometry of porous media and their physi- 
cal properties. (schwartz@ridgefield.sdr.slb.com) 
Edmund Fordham graduated in physics from the University 
of Cambridge in 1977. He returned in 1980 for graduate studies at 
the Cavendish Laboratory, receiving his PhD degree in applied 
fluid mechanics in 1984. He joined Schlumberger Cambridge Re- 
search in 1985, where he has worked on borehole filtration, inva- 
sion, and multiphase flow. From 1990 to 1992 he was a Royal 
Society Industrial Fellow at the Herchel Smith Laboratory, Uni- 
versity of Cambridge, where he studied NMR imaging of trans- 
port processes in porous media. Since April 1996 he has been a 
Senior Research Scientist at Schlumberger-Doll Research. 
He is a member of the SPE, the Institute of Physics (London), 
and is a European Engineer of the Federation Europeenne d’As- 
sociations Nationales d’Ingenieurs (FEANI). (fordham@ridge- 
field.sdr.slb.com) 
July-AuguSt 1999 The Log Analyst 269 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021

--- PAGE 11 ---
Schwartz et al. 
William Kenyon is a scientific advisor in the Interpretation 
Scicncc Department at Schlumberger-Doll Research, Ridgefield, 
Connecticut. His present interests are carbonate reservoirs and 
nuclear magnetic resonance petrophysics. Bill was previously 
program lcader in rock physics and department head of the soft- 
ware cngincering group. He joined Schlumberger in 1968 in 
Houston. He has a BS degree in engineering physics from the 
Univcrsity of Toronto and a PhD degree in electrical engineering 
from Princeton University. (kenyon@ridgefield.sdr.slb.com) 
David Wilkinson received a BA degree in mathematics from 
Trinity Collegc, Cambridge in 1969, and a PhD degree in theo- 
retical physics from the University of Pennsylvania in 1975. Af- 
ter postdoctoral positions at S.U.N.Y Stony Brook and the Fermi 
National Accelerator Laboratory, he joined Schlumbergcr-Doll 
Research in 198 1, whcre he worked on petrophysics, fluid flow in 
porous media, and log interpretation. He lcft Schlumberger in 
1996, and is currently working as an independent consultant in 
the financial industry. (DaveWiIk@worldnet.att.net) 
270 The Log Analyst July-AuguSt 1999 
Downloaded from http://onepetro.org/petrophysics/article-pdf/2197251/spwla-1999-v40n4a1.pdf/1 by University of Kansas user on 15 November 2021