--- PAGE 1 ---
Perspectives in Magnetic Resonance
Magnetic Resonance of Porous Media (MRPM): A perspective
Yi-Qiao Song ⇑
Schlumberger-Doll Research, One Hampshire Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 25 August 2012
Revised 11 November 2012
Available online 10 December 2012
Keywords:
Porous media
Microstructure
Relaxation
Diffusion
Magnetic resonance
abstract
Porous media are ubiquitous in our environment and their application is extremely broad. The common
connection between these diverse materials is the importance of the microstructure ( lm to mm scale) in
determining the physical, chemical and biological functions and properties. Magnetic resonance and its
imaging modality have been essential for noninvasive characterization of these materials, in the develop-
ment of catalysts, understanding cement hydration, ﬂuid transport in rocks and soil, geological prospect-
ing, and characterization of tissue properties for medical diagnosis. The past two decades have witnessed
signiﬁcant development of MRPM that couples advances in physics, chemistry and engineering with a
broad range of applications. This article will summarize key advances in basic physics and methodology,
examine their limitations and envision future R&D directions.
/C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Look around your home, ofﬁces, laboratories, buildings, and the
cities you live in and visit. You will ﬁnd that our living environ-
ment is not only ﬁlled with porous materials, but they perform
essential functions in our modern society. For example, concrete,
the single most used material in the world at two billion tons
per year, is an aggregates of complex chemistry and pore struc-
tures from nanometer to centimeter scales. Porous stones, wood,
composites, and ﬁbrous materials such as papers are a common
sight in ofﬁces and homes. Near-surface aquifers store 99% of the
planet’s fresh water in highly porous and unconsolidated rocks.
Porous sedimentary rock formations provide much of the primary
energy (oil and gas) that powers the modern economy and living
standard. The scale of our energy need is one of the most promi-
nent drivers for scientiﬁc and technological development to under-
stand and control porous media.
Porous media are generally considered a material with structures
of importance at length scales larger than atoms and these struc-
tures are essential for the material properties and performance.
For example, ﬂuid transport is an essential property for many porous
media from water and contamination movement in aquifers, chem-
ical reactions in porous catalysts, ﬁltration, gas exchange in lung tis-
sue, and blood and oxygen perfusion in brain and cancer growth.
Magnetic resonance (MR) is uniquely suited for such studies primar-
ily because the pore ﬁlling ﬂuid often exhibits a strong MR signal and
the power of MR allows direct detection of the ﬂuid through spin
relaxation, diffusion, ﬂow and imaging experiments.
MR experiment can be performed without physical contact of
the sample. This is an advantage that cannot be overemphasized.
Many other analytical techniques require contact, sampling, sam-
ple manipulation, single phase or optical transparency. It is partic-
ularly powerful when the materials of investigation are large,
immobile or optically opaque. Magnetic Resonance of Porous Med-
ia (MRPM) has become an exciting branch of science that enjoys
broad range of applications and opportunities to engage in multi-
disciplinary research.
This article will summarize a few aspects of MR research of por-
ous media mainly from a personal perspective. The focus is the
essential physical processes that have enabled the use of MR for
porous media study and the methodology development in the past
two decades. Then I will discuss the limitation of the current meth-
odology and future directions of MRPM. Instrumentation is critical
to MRPM and is well covered in a recent book [1]. I will touch upon
the instrument need in the last chapter.
1.1. Classical period: 1950–2000
The study of porous materials using MR started from the early
days of MR. In 1956, Varian ﬁled a patent describing a method to
perform MR at the Earth magnetic ﬁeld frequency to detect ground
water [2]. In the same year, Torrey published a paper entitled
‘‘Bloch equations with diffusion terms’’ [3] laying the foundation
to understand the complex diffusion dynamics inside the porous
media. Brown [4] considered magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneity due
to the packing of the grains in a model porous media. From late
1960s and early 1970s NMR relaxation properties have been con-
sidered a potential for characterizing permeability of porous rocks
[5,6]. The basic physics of the surface relaxation mechanisms has
1090-7807/$ - see front matter /C2112012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmr.2012.11.010
⇑ Fax: +1 617 768 2386.
E-mail address: ysong@slb.com
Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Journal of Magnetic Resonance
journal homepage: www.else vier.com/locate/jmr

--- PAGE 2 ---
also been studied [7,8] and its relationship to pore surface area
[9,10]. In 1982, two papers outlined a concept to use spin relaxa-
tion to probe surface-to-volume ratio (SVR) [11,12] which is still
in wide application today. In late 1970s, Brownstein and Tarr pub-
lished two classic papers [13,14] combining diffusion and surface
relaxation demonstrating the complexity and richness of MR at
probing the pore structure. Since then, NMR spin relaxation has
found extended applications in the study of many materials, such
as cement [15,16], microporous materials such as zeolites [17],
and subsurface rock formations [18].
In parallel to the development of the spin relaxation theory, di-
rect measurement of diffusion was also found to be a fruitful ap-
proach to characterize pore space. The effect of the pore space on
molecular diffusion was recognized in early 1960s [19,20]. Work
on restricted diffusion in open pores led to the concept of
time-dependent diffusion coefﬁcient [21–24] as the key physics
to describe diffusion dynamics in porous media. Callaghan et al.
[25,26] discovered the diffusion diffraction phenomenon
when the gradient wavelength approaches the characteristic pore
size.
For geological prospecting, traditional laboratory MR equip-
ment is clearly inadequate because it requires the sample to be in-
side the magnet. Inside-out pulsed MR design was pursued in the
early 1980s [27,28] using permanent magnet array to produce sig-
niﬁcant magnetic ﬁeld outside the instrument. Such idea has
grown into a large array of MR tools for well-logging and estab-
lished an important service for petroleum and mining exploration,
water aquifer prospecting [29,30], as well as diverse range of de-
vices for research and concepts [1]. This period was reviewed by
Kleinberg in Ref. [31].
1.2. Modern period: 2000–now
One key technology shift in the past decade is the wide adop-
tion of the two-dimensional (2D) and multi-dimensional (MD)
MR methodology for relaxation and diffusion. This is similar to
the adoption of the 2D and MD methods for Fourier spectroscopy
starting in 1970s. In contrast, a 2D-relaxation experiment requires
2D Laplace inversion which is signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult than its
1D counterpart and MD Fourier inversion. The development of an
efﬁcient algorithm for 2D Laplace inversion was the key for the
adoption of the 2D methods. Such MD method signiﬁcantly en-
hanced the spectral resolution of relaxation and diffusion and has
been applied in many research laboratories and commercially in
well-logging.
In addition to enhance resolution, 2D methodologies open a
new possibility to study the dynamics of spin and molecular mo-
tion. For example, chemical exchange and complex diffusion
dynamics can be studied by T
2–T2 and T1–T2 type of experiments,
in a similar fashion as COSY and NOESY.
Biological tissues exhibit complex structures and many aspects
are similar to inorganic porous media. For example, trabecular
bones are porous and their porous structure is known to be
important to the mechanical integrity. The loss of bone and its
structure is a key cost of bone fracture especially at advanced
ages. Perfusion of tissues of nutrients, oxygen, and drug mole-
cules is important for understanding tissue physiology and drug
delivery. Imaging the ﬂow and diffusion of contrast agents using
DCE-MRI is in many ways mirroring the experiments to under-
stand ﬂuid ﬂow in subsurface rocks and soils. Imaging of brain
microstructure using DTI (diffusion tensor imaging [32]) and
DSI (diffusion spectrum imaging [33]) has greatly advanced our
understanding of brain structure and neuroanatomy. However,
such approaches have not been broadly applied to study inor-
ganic porous media.
2. Physics: surface relaxation and diffusion
2.1. Spin relaxation and diffusion
Spin relaxation is a key parameter describing the dynamics of
the spins under investigation and its interaction with the sur-
rounding environment. Many physical processes could contribute
to such relaxation. For example, magnetic ions could exhibit a
strong ﬂuctuating magnetic ﬁeld in its immediate surrounding.
Such magnetic ion can be a strong relaxation source for the
nearby nuclear spins and also those that travel to the close prox-
imity temporarily. In ﬂuid ﬁlled porous media, relaxation occurs
at the ﬂuid/solid boundary when the ﬂuid spins (such as water
molecules) diffuse to the surface. Such behavior can be charac-
terized by a surface relaxivity which is proportional to the ion
density. The resulting relaxation rate of the pore ﬂuid is then
proportional to SVR which is an important parameter of the pore
structure.
In a molecular ﬂuid without magnetic components, the spin
relaxation is often dominated by the dipolar interaction between
nuclear spins. The magnetic ﬁeld experienced by one spin from an-
other may vary as the distance and/or the orientation of the pair
changes. As a result, both translational and rotational diffusion
may introduce a ﬂuctuating magnetic ﬁeld to cause spin relaxation.
In many liquids, dipolar relaxation due to protons on the same
molecule is the main source of relaxation. For example, the rota-
tional diffusion of small molecules tends to be fast and the correla-
tion time is short and thus the relaxation is weak. For larger
molecules, their rotational correlation time is longer and thus the
relaxation is more effective. Hence spin relaxation can be used as
a means to determine molecular size.
Molecular translational diffusion shares a similar behavior in
bulk ﬂuids with relaxation that smaller molecules diffuse faster
and larger molecules slower. Since bulk ﬂuid diffusion constant
of many substances is known and well studied, diffusion can be
used to identify molecules and ﬂuid phases in a mixture.
2.2. Diffusion and relaxation of chain molecules
Characterization of bulk ﬂuid diffusion is a prerequisite for the
understanding of its diffusion in porous media. Diffusion of solid
spherical particles can be well described by the Stoke–Einstein
relationship. However, for molecules with signiﬁcant internal
structure, such as long chain molecules (e. g. polymers, hydrocar-
bon chains), the internal molecular motion can have a signiﬁcant
effect on the diffusion properties. For example, the diffusion coef-
ﬁcient is often found to be a power law for polymers and alkanes
[34–36].
Generally, the diffusion coefﬁcient of an individual molecule in
a mixture can be divided into two parts. One part depends on the
individual molecule, such as its size, internal structure and stiff-
ness; and the second part depends on the properties of the sur-
rounding ﬂuid, such as the density and the viscosity. Thus, the
diffusion coefﬁcient for the ith component ( D
i) should have the
form: Di ¼ N/C0 m
i gðfNi gÞ, where g({Ni}) is a function of all compo-
nents in the mixture and common for all molecules. Freed et al.
[37] have found that this relationship is indeed true for a large
number of alkane mixtures that strongly validated the above mod-
el. They further showed a complete scaling relationship,
Di ¼ AN/C0 m
i N/C0 b; ð1Þ
where N is the average chain length. This scaling relationship can be
used to obtain mixture composition directly from diffusion and
relaxation, for example, using low ﬁeld NMR [37,38].
Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24 13

--- PAGE 3 ---
2.3. Relaxation in porous media
When a ﬂuid saturates the pore space, interaction between the
ﬂuid molecules and the solid surface may contribute to additional
relaxation, a phenomenon often called surface relaxation. One
source of such relaxation is the presence of magnetic ions on the
solid surface. When a water molecule diffuse close the surface,
the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld can cause spin relaxation [7,8,39,40]. Such sur-
face relaxation has been directly measured by drying the pore ﬂuid
to only a monolayer on the solid surfaces [15]. Field dependent T1
of ﬂuid saturated porous media [41–43] show anomalous diffusion
dynamics on the solid surface to be characteristic of Lévy walk.
Independent of the mechanism of surface relaxation, the exper-
imentally measured relaxation rate is often found to be propor-
tional to SVR. This may be understood by considering only a
surface layer of thickness d of the ﬂuid is affected by the surface
relaxation, to have a relaxation time of T
s. The volume of this layer
is dS where S is the total surface area of the sample. Since water
molecules will diffuse between this thin layer and the bulk space
of the pores (total pore volume of Vp), the measured relaxation will
be an average between the surface and bulk volumes,
1
T1;2
¼ 1
T1b;2b
þ dS
Vp
/C1 1
T1s;2s
ð2Þ
where the subscript 1 and 2 denotes T1 and T2, respectively and the
subscript s denotes the relaxation of the surface layer. T1b and T2b
are the bulk relaxation of T1 and T2. The above equation is often
rewritten in term of surface relaxivity, q /C17d/Ts,
1
T1;2
¼ 1
T1b;2b
þ q1;2
S
Vp
: ð3Þ
and q1 and q2 denote the surface relaxivity for T1 and T2 processes.
The validity of the above discussion [9,11] is dependent on a key
assumption that the water molecules diffuse rapidly between the
surface and the bulk regions so that the relaxation effect is aver-
aged. This is often called the fast diffusion assumption. Brownstein
and Tarr [14] described an analytical solution of diffusion-relaxa-
tion equations in a few simple geometries demonstrating the
importance of diffusion in relaxation measurements and interpreta-
tion. For arbitrary pore geometries numerical methods can be ap-
plied to solve the combined relaxation and diffusion problem
with regard to NMR experiments [44,45]. Further theory of diffu-
sion dynamics for NMR will be discussed in Section 4.
2.4. Diffusion in complex media
It is well-known that a porous structure reduces the diffusion of
molecules in the pore-ﬁlling ﬂuid. This behavior is often character-
ized by a reduced diffusion coefﬁcient as compared to its bulk va-
lue ( D0). Solid porous materials such as rock and soil are, to an
approximation, a packing of solid particles with interstitial space
occupied by ﬂuids. This is the case in petroleum reservoirs and
water aquifers. When water molecules are near a solid pore wall,
the space available for the movement of the water molecules is re-
duced since the solid wall cannot be penetrated by water. For
example, if a molecule starts right at the surface, the only allowed
movement is away from the wall [46] so that the range of displace-
ment is reduced from that of free diffusion. In biological tissues,
cell membranes exhibit ﬁnite permeability to water transport thus
limiting the diffusion displacement through the membranes and in
tissues. Also, some tissues exhibit speciﬁc cell shapes, such as the
elongated plant cells and extended neurons in animals, the diffu-
sion restriction can be anisotropic. This can give rise to diffusion
anisotropy.
For a closed system such as ﬂuid drops, the long time displace-
ment is ﬁnite and limited by the size of the enclosing structure. For
example, at the limit of long diffusion time when the initial and ﬁ-
nal positions are uncorrelated, the mean square displacement is
hDr2i/C17
ZZ
jr1 /C0 r2j2Pðr1; r2; tÞdr1dr2 ð4Þ
¼ 1
Vp
ZZ
jr1 /C0 r2j2dr1dr2 ð5Þ
¼2ðhr2i/C0h ri2Þ; ð6Þ
where P is the diffusion propagator and P =1 /Vp at long time ( Vp is
the pore volume). For a sphere of diameter d, hDr2i can be evaluated
and is given by
hDr2i¼ 3d
2
=5: ð7Þ
For NMR experiments measuring diffusion along one direction, the
mean-square displacement will be one-third of hDr2i. This phenom-
enon has been used to characterize emulsions [47,48].
For an open porous system where the pore space is intercon-
nected, there are two aspects of this effect. One is that at short dif-
fusion time, those molecules near the surface of the solid matrix
(or grains) have less free space to diffuse and the net displacement
is reduced. This effect is directly proportional to SVR of the mate-
rial and it is often characterized by a reduced diffusion coefﬁcient
[23],
DðtÞ
D0
/C25 1 /C0 A
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D0t
p S
Vp
; ð8Þ
where D0 is the bulk diffusion coefﬁcient, and D(t) is the diffusion
coefﬁcient at the diffusion time t. A is a constant dependent on
dimensionality. The approximation is valid when the diffusion dis-
tance ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃD0tp is much less than pore size. Here the diffusion coefﬁ-
cient is deﬁned as hDx(t)2i/2t, where x(t) is the net displacement
along one direction at time t and hDx(t)2i is the mean square dis-
placement. For isotropic diffusion in three dimensions, D(t) can be
deﬁned from the vector displacement Dr: D(t)= hDr(t)2i/6t.
The second effect is the long time diffusion when the diffusion
distance, ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃD0tp is larger than the characteristic length scale of the
pores, such as the pore size. For an open system, D(t) will approach
a constant at long time, but with a value less than D0. This is be-
cause the diffusing molecules have to travel around the grains so
that the distance to travel in order to achieve a displacement x is
larger than x. In other words, such molecules have to meander
around the grains (geometrical obstacles) in a similar way as
motorists have to travel along predetermined streets instead of
moving straight to destinations. The reduction of the long time dif-
fusion coefﬁcient compared to D0 is related to the tortuosity factor
T [21],
Dðt !1 Þ
D0
¼ 1
T : ð9Þ
For more theoretical review of the physics of diffusion in porous
media, please refer to the papers by Sen [49] and Grebenkov [50].
2.5. Diffusion in internal ﬁeld
The diffusion coefﬁcient is often measured by applying known
magnetic ﬁeld gradients. When a porous sample is placed in a uni-
form magnetic ﬁeld (such as the NMR/MRI magnet), the magnetic
ﬁeld inside the sample, in particular, inside the pore space, is nat-
urally inhomogeneous due to the susceptibility contrast between
the solid phase and the ﬂuid in the pores. Molecular diffusion in
such an internal ﬁeld can be detected by NMR and it has been show
to reﬂect the underlying pore geometry [51–54]. The spatial proﬁle
of this ﬁeld will be determined by the structure of the underlying
14 Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24

--- PAGE 4 ---
porous medium. While this assertion is qualitatively not surpris-
ing, in fact, quantitative connections exist between the pore struc-
ture and the magnetic ﬁeld structure. For example, the two-point
correlation function of the internal ﬁeld is closely related to the
structural factor of the medium in a model system [55,56]. Exper-
imental method has been developed to speciﬁcally use this internal
ﬁeld to extract pore size distributions in inorganic porous materi-
als and tissues [57,58].
2.6. Diffusion anisotropy
If the enclosing structure exhibits anisotropy, such as a long cyl-
inder, the diffusive motion of the molecules will reﬂect this con-
ﬁnement symmetry. Considering the long cylinder with a
diameter r and a length L, and L /C29 r. When the diffusion time D
is such that
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
DD
p
/C24 r, the diffusion across the cylinder is signiﬁ-
cantly restricted leading to an apparent diffusion constant much
reduced from its bulk value. However, along the axial direction,ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
DD
p
/C28 L, thus the axial extent of the structure is not reﬂected in
the axial diffusion and the axial diffusion constant will remain
close to the bulk diffusion coefﬁcient. This diffusion anisotropy
can be approximated by a second rank tensor. In biomedical imag-
ing, this diffusion anisotropy is often used to characterize the ﬁber
structure of tissues through the technique of diffusion tensor imag-
ing (DTI) [59,32].
3. Multidimensional NMR of relaxation and diffusion
Conventional NMR relaxation and diffusion techniques measure
one parameter (e.g. T1 and T2, T1q,o r D) in a single experiment. For
example, T2 is typically obtained by executing a series of NMR
experiments with changing relaxation time period, t, and measur-
ing the signal at each t. For a single species of spins, the signal de-
cays in an exponential functional form. For mixtures, each
component may have a unique T2 value and thus the total signal
(M) will be a superposition of many exponential functions,
MðtÞ¼
X
i
mi expð/C0 t=T2iÞð 10Þ
where T2i is the relaxation time constant and mi the amplitude of
the signal from component i. For example, in a ﬂuid mixture of dif-
ferent molecules, the smaller molecules often exhibit faster transla-
tional and rotational diffusion and thus longer T2. Thus, the
distribution of T2 can be used to quantify molecular weight distribu-
tions. In porous media, T2 is found to be enhanced by surface relax-
ation and thus used to measure pore sizes. However, in a more
complex sample, such as a porous rock saturated with a mixture
of water and oil, the relaxation time constant of water and oil
may be similar due to a combination of oil molecular size and water
surface relaxation.
The newly developed multi-dimensional (MD) NMR technique
improves the resolution of different molecules by measuring the
correlation function of two or more parameters, such as T1–T2 cor-
relation, D–T2, T1–T2–D, and D–D. The one-dimensional (1D) NMR
experiment typically refers to an experiment that measures signals
as a function of a particular experimentally controlled parameter,
such as a time delay in the pulse sequence, the amplitude of an
RF pulse, or the amplitude of the ﬁeld gradient pulse. In contrast,
MD NMR is performed by varying two or more experimental
parameters and acquires NMR signals as a two- or higher dimen-
sional data matrices. Laplace inversion of such MD matrices is used
to obtain the multi-parameter correlation functions. Such MD cor-
relation spectrum allows more separation of signals from different
components, helps to identify different phases and to observe
changes of the composition and physical properties.
For example, a T1–T2 correlation experiment uses two parame-
ters: ta for the T1 recovery time, and tb for the T2 decay time. Typ-
ically, for every value of ta, data at the full range of tb is acquired. In
this case, the ﬁnal data set is a full 2D matrix. Other experiments
may not require to ﬁll the entire 2D data matrix.
This type of correlation experiments was ﬁrst reported in 1980s
to study the multiple components of a chemical and biological sys-
tems. Even though the NMR experiments of this type could be per-
formed on the NMR spectrometer at the time, data analysis was a
considerable barrier due to the requirement of large computing
power and computer memory [60]. In early 2000, a new algorithm
was developed to rapidly perform the multi-dimensional Laplace
inversion without the huge memory requirement so that MD
NMR data can be analyzed on regular PCs and laptops [61]. This
development leads to a rapid expansion of application of the MD
methodology in geological materials [61–63], chemistry [64],
material science [65,66], food science [67,68]. It has been since
used commercially in petroleum exploration [69].
3.1. Relaxation correlation experiments: T
1–T2
The pulse sequence for a T1–T2 experiment is the following:
RD /C0 p /C0 ta|ﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄ}
first part
/C0 p
2 /C0 te=2 /C0 p /C0 te
2 /C0 Acq /C0 te
2
/C20/C21
N|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
second part
: ð11Þ
where N is the echo number, RD the recycle delay, and Acq is data
acquisition. The ﬁrst time variable is ta and the second one is tb =
Nte. This sequence is essentially a combination of the inversion-
recovery and the CPMG, thus it is often called IRCPMG. The CPMG
is used to detect the signal of T2 decay from the end of the T1 recov-
ery period. For a spin species with a speciﬁc T1 and T2, the signal is
proportional to [1–2exp (- ta/T1)]exp (-tb/T2), thus the total signal as
a function of ta and tb is
Mðta; tbÞ¼
ZZ
ð1 /C0 2e/C0 ta =T1 Þe/C0 tb =T2 /C2F ð T1; T2ÞdT1dT2; ð12Þ
where Fð T1; T2Þ is the probability density of molecules with speciﬁc
T1 and T2. To obtain F from data M, a 2D Laplace inversion is
needed.
3.2. Relaxation correlation experiments: T 2–T2
The general concept of a 2D NMR experiment is ﬂexible to in-
clude arbitrary spin evolution for the ﬁrst and second periods.
The T2–T2 experiment is an interesting example that both periods
involve T2 relaxation process. The pulse sequence is shown below
p
2 /C0 te
2 /C0 p /C0 te
2
/C20/C21
n
/C0 p
2|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
T2 relaxation ðTa
2 Þ
/C0 D /C0 p
2 /C0 te
2 /C0 p /C0 te
2 /C0 Acq /C0 te
2
/C20/C21
m|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
T2 relaxation ðTb
2 Þ
: ð13Þ
The ﬁrst segment involves T2 relaxation through the use of CPMG
sequence with n p pulses and the echo signals is not measured.
The second p/2 pulse at the end of the [ ... ]n rotates the magnetiza-
tion back to the z-axis. It is important to note that this magnetiza-
tion has gone through T2 relaxation for this period. During the
subsequence delay time of D, the spins experience T1 relaxation
since they are aligned with B0. The second period is a CPMG se-
quence of m p pulses and the echo train is acquired. In this exper-
iment, the two T2 relaxation evolutions are measured by two
independent times, ta = nte and tb = mte.
The inclusion of the time D is important for this experiment be-
cause the two T2 variables are measured at different times ( Ta
2 and
Tb
2). If the system is static, that is the T2 of a molecule is identical
before and after D, then Ta
2 ¼ Tb
2. On the two-dimensional plot of
Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24 15

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ta
2 vs. Tb
2, only diagonal signals (i.e. Ta
2 ¼ Tb
2) will appear and there
will be no off-diagonal signals ( Ta
2 – Tb
2). If, however, during D,
the T2 of a molecule is changed, then an off-diagonal signal ap-
pears. Such an experiment thus has the potential to characterize
the complex system dynamics (e.g. Refs. [64,70]). Since T1 relaxa-
tion is effective during D period, the range of this period is limited
by T1.
Similar concepts have been demonstrated recently for other
relaxation processes, such as T1–T1 experiment, T1q–T1q experi-
ment. These different experiments examine different relaxation
mechanisms that could be sensitive to other aspects of molecular
dynamics. They are an interesting extension of the T2–T2 concept
and their potentials are to be explored.
3.3. Diffusion-relaxation correlation experiments
Fig. 1 illustrates two implementations of the diffusion-relaxation
experiment using pulse ﬁeld gradients. In the ﬁrst implementation,
a spin-echo sequence is used for segment 1 with a gradient pair be-
fore and after the second pulse. The ﬁrst echo spacing tcp1 is often
quite long, several milliseconds, in order to allow sufﬁcient time
for the gradient pulses to yield an appropriate diffusion decay
given the diffusion constant of the sample. The second echo spac-
ing during segment 2 is often very short, for example, 100 ls, to in-
crease the number of echoes and to reduce the effect of
background gradients. The diffusion decay caused by this segment
is known [71] as
exp /C0 Dc2g2d2ðD þ 2d=3Þ
/C2/C3
; ð14Þ
where c is the gyromagnetic ratio, D the diffusion constant, g the
amplitude of the gradients, d the during of the gradient pulse, and
D the time period between the two gradients. This equation is valid
within the Gaussian phase approximation, such as diffusion in bulk
ﬂuids.
A stimulated echo with pulsed gradients can also be used for
the diffusion weighting segment, Fig. 1B. The ﬁrst three 90 /C176pulses
and the two associated gradient pulses produce the stimulated
echo. The 180 /C176pulses afterward refocus the magnetization repeat-
edly producing a train of echoes. Similar to the spin-echo case for
the diffusion weighting ( Fig. 1 A), the period between the ﬁrst two
pulses is often several milliseconds long to allow sufﬁcient gradi-
ent-induced modulation. In addition, the diffusion time between
the 2nd and 3rd pulses ( /C24 D) allows a further increase of diffusion
weighting. A long D period can be particularly useful for samples
with a short T2 but a long T1.
For the case of the spin-echo for diffusion weighting, the full
kernel, k, can be written as
k ¼ expð/C0 2tcp1=T2Þ/C2 exp /C0 Dc2g2d2ðD þ 2d=3Þ
/C2/C3
/C2 expð/C0 2ntcp=T2Þ; ð15Þ
where the ﬁrst factor is the T2 decay during the ﬁrst segment which
can be a ﬁxed constant provided tcp1 is kept constant for different
g’s. The full kernel for the stimulated echo case can be written as
k ¼ expð/C0 2tcp1=T2 /C0 Td=T1Þ/C2 exp /C0 Dc2g2d2ðD þ 2d=3Þ
/C2/C3
/C2 expð/C0 2ntcp=T2Þ: ð16Þ
The ﬁrst factor is the T1 and T2 decay during the ﬁrst segment. In
both cases, the kernel can be written as a tensor product.
A static ﬁeld gradient can also be used to measure diffusion
[72,73]. A static ﬁeld gradient is always present in regions away
from the geometric center of most NMR magnets, and also in specif-
ically designed magnets using permanent magnets, such as the
NMR well-logging tool [74], Garﬁeld magnet [75] and the NMR
MOUSE [76]. Such permanent magnet can be miniaturized, inex-
pensive, and there is no need for pulsed ﬁeld gradients, signiﬁcantly
simplifying the equipment and operation of diffusion experiments.
3.4. Diffusion-diffusion correlation experiment
Similar to the relaxation-relaxation correlation technique, diffu-
sion can be used for the both dimensions of the 2D experiment.
Using pulsed ﬁeld gradients, the pulse sequence is shown in
Fig. 2 . Such experiment can also be performed with spin echo se-
quence, for example, using the segment 1 in Fig. 1 A for both seg-
ment. The one advantage of the stimulated echo based sequence
(Fig. 2 ) is its ﬂexibility in adjusting Td. For either case, we use b1
and b2 to denote the diffusion weighting for segment 1 and 2,
the kernel can be written as
k ¼ exp /C0 D1b1 /C0 D2b2½/C138 ð 17Þ
Here we have ignored the relaxation contribution to the kernel
since they are kept constant in an experiment.
Both segments measure the diffusion coefﬁcient, however, at
different times separated by Td. We will use D1 and D2 to denote
the diffusion coefﬁcient associated with the ﬁrst and second seg-
ments (gradient g1 and g2), respectively. If a molecule does not
change its diffusion coefﬁcient during Td, then D1 = D2. If the mol-
ecule changes its own conﬁguration of environment during Td, then
D1 – D2. On a 2D plot with axes D1 and D2, signals with D1 = D2 are
on the diagonal line and the that with D1 – D2 are off-diagonal. As
a result, the off-diagonal signal can be an indication of molecular
exchange and dynamics.
tcptcp1 tcp1 2tcp90
Segment 1 Segment 2
180
RF
Grad
g
(A)
tcptcp1 tcp1 2tcp2tcp90
Segment 1 Segment 2
180
RF
Grad
g
(B)
Td
Δ
Δδδ
δδ
Fig. 1. Diffusion-relaxation correlation sequences using pulsed ﬁeld gradients. (A)
The ﬁrst segment is a spin-echo with the echo appearing at a time 2 tcp1 after the
ﬁrst pulse. (B) The ﬁrst segment is a stimulated echo appearing at a time tcp1 after
the third pulse. The detection (2nd) segment for both is a CPMG pulse train. The
amplitude or the duration of the gradient pairs in both sequences is incremented in
order to vary the diffusion weighting.
t cp1 tcp190
Segment 2Segment 1
RF
Grad
g1 g1
tcp1 tcp190
g2 g2
Td
δδ δδ
Fig. 2. Diffusion–Diffusion correlation sequences using pulsed ﬁeld gradients. The
two segments are both a stimulated echo sequence. At the end of the ﬁrst
stimulated echo, a p/2 pulse is used at a time tcp1 after the third pulse in order to
rotate the stimulated echo magnetization to the longitudinal direction. The 2nd
segment detects the stimulated echo. All RF pulses are
p/2. The amplitude or the
duration of the two gradient pairs ( g1 and g2) are incremented independently.
16 Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24

--- PAGE 6 ---
To include this exchange effect, the signal of the experiment can
be written as
Mðb1; b2Þ¼
ZZ
exp /C0 D1b1 /C0 D2b2½/C138 /C2F ð D1; D2; TdÞdD1dD2; ð18Þ
where Fð D1; D2; TdÞ is the probability density of molecules that
evolve from D1 to D2 over the time period Td, a concept similar to
that of the diffusion propagator. In an homogeneous system, the
correlation vanishes at long time so that Fð D1; D2;
Td !1 Þ¼ FðD1ÞFðD2Þ, where F(D) is the 1D diffusion distribution.
Thus the 2D plot of D1 and D2 will be very broad showing extended
exchanges between all values of diffusion.
On the other hand when Td is much shorter than the character-
istic exchange time, then D1 and D2 are highly correlated, thus only
allowed signal will satisfy D1 = D2, and only diagonal signal can be
observed. Hence, the off-diagonal amplitude and its Td dependence
can be used as a measure of the exchange phenomenon. In fact, this
behavior is very similar to the conventional NOESY experiment in
2D Fourier spectroscopy.
3.5. Exchange or diffusion
It is important to distinguish this type of chemical exchange,
such as a chemical reaction, or a molecular conﬁguration modiﬁca-
tion, from diffusion dynamics. Diffusion in porous media, in
particular, diffusion between different pores, is often discussed in
the literature loosely as exchange, since it is often described as
the ﬂuid molecules ‘‘exchange’’ between different pores. However,
the behavior of chemical exchange and diffusion is fundamentally
different in a 2D NMR experiment. The mechanism of chemical
exchange is external to the spin Hamiltonian and its spin evolution
so that it can be introduced as an independent probability
(Fð D1; D2; TdÞ). However, for a stationary diffusion system, such
as ﬂuid ﬁlled pore space, the spin Hamiltonian considers diffusion
dynamics [44] fully and explicitly through Torrey equation, Eq. (19),
for all relaxation and diffusion pulse sequences. Thus, diffusion
between different pores should not be explicitly considered as
an independent probability. Also, the diffusion theory predicts sev-
eral features that cannot be explained by the exchange formalism.
The theory of 2D NMR for diffusion system is discussed in
Section 4.
4. Theory of 2D NMR of diffusion systems
4.1. Diffusion equation and eigenmode methods
The magnetization evolution due to diffusion and relaxation can
be studied theoretically using the Bloch-Torrey equation [3]:
@
@t mr ; tðÞ ¼ Dr2mr ; tðÞ /C0 lmr ; tðÞ : ð19Þ
Here m(r, t) is the relative difference of the magnetization and its
equilibrium value, D is the bulk diffusion coefﬁcient, and l is the
bulk relaxation rate. Also, the spin precession is not considered here
because it is absent during T1 decay and being refocused during
CPMG. The general solution to the Torrey–Bloch equation can be
written as a sum of eigenmodes,
mr ; tðÞ ¼ e/C0 lt
X1
i¼0
ai/i rðÞ e/C0 t=si ; ð20Þ
where /i and si are normalized eigenfunctions and eigenvalues,
respectively. /i with different indices are orthogonal to each other,
and satisfy the following equation:
Dr2/i rðÞ þ 1
si
/i rðÞ ¼ 0: ð21Þ
The pore boundary behaves as a magnetization sink due to the sur-
face relaxation thus the diffusion ﬂux into the surface is related to
the strength of the surface relaxivity q:
D^n /C1r/i þ q/i ¼ 0; ð22Þ
where ^n is the unit vector normal to the surface. Once the location
of the boundaries are known, the above equation can be applied to
determine the eigenvalues. Analytical and numerical solutions and
the properties of these solutions have been reported in the litera-
ture [14,77,78,45,79].
Since the T1 and T2 processes may have contributions from dif-
ferent mechanisms, thus the surface relaxivity is in general differ-
ent for T1 and T2, so we label them as q1 and q2, respectively. As a
result, we need to consider two sets of eigenmodes corresponding
to the T1 and T2 dynamics. We call the two sets of modes L-modes
and T-modes and denote them /L
i and /T
i and their eigenvalues T1i
and T2i, respectively [44]. For example, during a inversion recovery
experiment, q1 and /L
i are modes to describe the spin dynamics,
while for CPMG, q2 and /T
i .
Here we show the solution for one-dimensional model to show
an intuitive understanding of the eigenmodes. In a one-dimen-
sional pore, the Torrey–Bloch equation can be solved analytically
and with fast diffusion and weak relaxation, it can be shown that
the eigenvalues are [14]
s0 /C25 d
q ð23Þ
si /C25 d
2
Dp2i2 ; i ¼ 1; 2; 3; ... ð24Þ
where d is the pore size, q the surface relaxivity. The eigenfunctions
/i(r) for this case are readily calculated. The ‘‘ground state’’ eigen-
function /0(r) is approximately constant across the pore, while
the higher order functions ( i > 0) oscillate in space [13,80,79].
Any magnetization, m(r, t), can be decomposed into a sum of the
eigenmodes, Eq. (20). The weight of these ‘‘modes’’ in the magneti-
zation is given by a coefﬁcient ai, which is determined by the over-
lap integral of m(r, t) with the i-th eigenmode, ai ¼R drmðr; 0Þ/iðrÞ.
This weighting can be selectively manipulated to some extent
through the choice of pulse sequence. Since the B1 ﬁeld is not spa-
tially varying over pore scale as in a typical NMR probe, the RF
pulses do not usually excite higher modes directly. It is typically
the spin evolution during the relaxation time or precession that cre-
ates the spatial modulation and thus higher modes. This scenario is
similar to the excitation of multiple quantum coherences in con-
ventional Fourier NMR spectroscopy that relies on the non-com-
muting Hamiltonian such as dipolar coupling. The more control is
exercised on which modes are ‘‘excited’’, the less error will be asso-
ciated with the data analysis for extracting pore microstructural
properties. For example in fast diffusion limit (
qd/D /C28 1), an inver-
sion recovery experiment will only excite the lowest mode, a0 – 0
[14]. This is because in fast diffusion, the lowest mode is approxi-
mately a constant in the pore space, /0 /C24 1/Vp. Such a ﬂat /0
matches well with the spatially ﬂat magnetization proﬁle ( m(r,0 )
at time zero) on the pore length scale. Thus a0/C25 1. Because the high-
er modes are orthogonal to /0; ai ¼
R
drmðr; 0Þ/iðrÞ/C25
R
dr/0/i ¼ 0
when i – 0. The ground state mode is sometimes referred to as
the relaxation mode for this reason. The decay of the modes of
i > 0 is primarily due to diffusion, hence the name ‘‘diffusion’’
modes.
It should be noted that the decomposition shown in Eq. (20) is
not necessarily a subdivision of spins, since all spins in general are
subject to both relaxation and diffusion. Rather, it is a classiﬁcation
of different spatial structures of magnetization modulation and
their corresponding decay dynamics.
Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24 17

--- PAGE 7 ---
4.2. 2D NMR of diffusion system
We will use the eigenmode formalism to describe the diffusion
dynamics during a 2D NMR experiment including the pulsed ﬁeld
gradient effect. The following examples will illustrate the applica-
tion of the eigenmode formalism to analyze pulse sequences. We
consider that the RF magnetic ﬁeld is uniform over the pore length
scale so that the RF pulses do not introduce additional spatial mod-
ulation. Also, all eigenmodes will be considered and the formalism
is applicable for all diffusion regimes, not limited to fast diffusion.
4.2.1. Relaxation correlation
A T1–T2 experiment using IRCPMG as shown in Eq. (11) involves
two periods with different spin dynamics. During the ta period, the
magnetization dynamics ( T1 process) is described by L-modes. The
magnetization, m1( r, ta), at the end of the ta period is
m1ðr; taÞ¼
X1
i¼0
ai/L
i ðrÞe/C0 ta =T1i : ð25Þ
Here ai is determined by the initial magnetization after the ﬁrst
180/C176pulse, m0(r)= /C0 1. Since different eigenmodes evolves at differ-
ent rate, the magnetization m1(r, t) may develop signiﬁcant spatial
variation as t evolves. After the 90 /C176pulse, the magnetization is ro-
tated to the transverse plane so that the spin dynamics is governed
by T-modes. Thus, the evolution of the CPMG echo signal, m (r, ta, tb),
is:
mðr; ta; tbÞ¼
X1
j¼0
bj/T
j ðrÞe/C0 tb =T2j : ð26Þ
where bj ¼R m1ðr; taÞ/T
j ðrÞdv. The detected time-domain signal is
simply the integral of the magnetization:
Sðta; tbÞ¼
Z
dv /C1mðr; ta; tbÞð 27Þ
¼
X
i;j
sije/C0 ta =T1i /C0 tb =T2j ð28Þ
where sij ¼h /T
j j1ih/T
j j/L
i ih/L
i j1i. Here we use the notation
h/jjwii¼
R
dv /C1//C3
j wi, and //C3
j is the complex conjugate of /j. Also,
j1i stands for a constant function within the pore space. The 2D
spectrum can be obtained after Laplace inversion as
s12ðT1; T2Þ¼
X
i;j
h1j/T
j ih/T
j j/L
i ih/L
i j1i/C2 dðT1 /C0 T1;iÞdðT2 /C0 T2;jÞ: ð29Þ
The signal corresponding to i = j are called diagonal, and those for
i – j are off-diagonal signals. One of the important feature of the
off-diagonal signals is that it measures the overlap integral of differ-
ent eigenmodes ( T- and L-modes). For example, if q1 = q2, then the
two sets of T- and L-modes are identical, thus there will be no off-
diagonal peaks. This is because of the orthogonality of eigenmodes,
and h/jj/ii = 0 (for i – j) [44].
The same framework can be used to analyze T2–T2 correlation
experiment Eq. (13) with the resulting 2D spectrum [44]:
s22ðTb
2; D; Ta
2Þ¼
X
p;q;r
h1j/T
p ih/T
p j/L
r ih/L
r j/T
q ih/T
q j1ie/C0 D=T1r /C2 dðTa
2
/C0 T2pÞdðTb
2 /C0 T2qÞ: ð30Þ
In contrast to the s12, s22 now has a user controlled parameter D
which can be used to manipulate the weight distribution among
the modes. When D = 0, since P
r j/L
r ih/L
r j¼ 1,
s22ðTa
2; 0; Tb
2Þ¼
X
p;q
dp;qh1j/T
p ih/T
q j1i/C2 dðTa
2 /C0 T2pÞdðTb
2 /C0 T2qÞ; ð31Þ
where only the diagonal signals survive. When D is long, the slow-
est T1 mode (r = 0) dominates the evolution and the weight distribu-
tion will be controlled by the non-orthogonality h/T
p j/L
0i between
the T1 (L) and T2 (T) modes.
For both T1–T2 and T2–T2 experiments, the presence of the off-
diagonal peak requires q1 – q2, independent of the diffusion re-
gime. This result is valid for any pore systems independent of pore
size and connectivity [44,81], a clear distinction from the phenom-
enon of molecular exchange. Even though the 1D pore is a very
simple model, it nevertheless illustrates many of the key features.
Ref. [44] has reported calculations of the 2D relaxation spectrum
for a range of surface relaxivity and timings to demonstrate the
behavior of off-diagonal signals. For example, it shows that in both
extreme fast or slow diffusion regimes, since the shape of the
eigenmodes becomes insensitive to q, then the two sets of T- and
L-modes are essentially identical and thus the amplitude of the
off-diagonal peaks approaches zero. For a simple 1D pore, a com-
plex off-diagonal signal with several peaks (some positive and oth-
ers negative) may exist when qd/D /C24 1 and q1 – q2.
Another interesting case of coupled pores was studied [44,80]
showing that diffusion between pores can be detected by the 2D
NMR methods. Fig. 3 shows T1–T2 spectra of a two-pores system
and the diffusion coupling is characterized by an effective distance
between them. At strong coupling, the two pores essentially form a
single pore and the 2D spectrum is a single peak. For very weak
coupling, right panel, the two pores are essentially unrelated and
thus the 2D spectrum is simply the superposition of the two pores.
In the intermediate coupling case, the diffusion dynamics are more
complex and the spectrum contains more pronounced off-diagonal
peaks. In this case, an observation of the off-diagonal signal should
be regarded as indicative of direct diffusion between different parts
of the pore space.
4.2.2. Diffusion experiments
A PFG-CPMG experiment such as shown in Fig. 1 involves two
periods with different spin dynamics. During the ﬁrst period, the
magnetization is ﬁrst modulated by the gradient pulse, then
demodulated by the same gradient after a time period D. The
T2 (secs)
T
10.10.01
1
0.1
0.01
10.1 10.01 0.1 0.01
1 (secs)
Fig. 3. 2D NMR T1–T2 spectra of coupled pores for different coupling lengths: strong (left), intermediate (middle), and weak coupling (right). Figure from [44].
18 Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24

--- PAGE 8 ---
magnetization, m1( r, s1), at the end of the second gradient pulse
period is
m1ðr; D; qÞ¼
X1
j¼0
ai/jðrÞe/C0 iqre/C0 D=Tkj ; ð32Þ
where aj ¼h 1je/C0 iqrj/ji/C17
R
e/C0 iqr/jðrÞdr. Depending on the PFG pulse
sequences, such as spin echo or stimulated echo, the corresponding
eigenmode and decay time constant Tkj will be used ( /T and T2j for
spin echo and /L and T1j for stimulated echo).
The second period is a CPMG sequence so that the spin dynam-
ics is governed by /T modes. Thus, the evolution of the echo signal,
m (r, D, q, t), is:
mðr; D; tÞ¼
X1
j¼0
bj/T
j ðrÞe/C0 t=T2j : ð33Þ
where bj is determined by m1(r, D, q):
bj ¼
Z
m1ðr; s1; qÞ/T
j ðrÞdv: ð34Þ
The detected time-domain signal is the integral of the magnetiza-
tion over the sample volume:
SðD; q; tÞ¼
Z
dv /C1mðr; D; q; tÞ¼
X
l;j
sljðqÞe/C0 D=Tkl /C0 t=T2j ð35Þ
where sljðqÞ¼h 1jeiqrj/lih/lje/C0 iqrj/T
j ih/T
j j1i.
5. Laplace inversion
Spin relaxation and diffusion are typically manifested as decay-
ing signals. Data analysis then often involves a Laplace inversion to
obtain a spectrum (or distribution) of relaxation times or diffusion
constants. This inversion is ill-conditioned in the sense that small
noise in the data can cause signiﬁcant changes in the resulting
spectrum. For experimental data with noise, the ill-conditioned
nature also manifests itself as the existence of inﬁnite number of
solutions that satisfy the noise model. For such ill-conditioned
inversion problems, it is most desirable to quantify the properties
of the entire solution space [82]. However, the conventional ap-
proaches aim at ﬁnding a single best solution according to a certain
criterion, such as stability against noise.
One common class of methods is designed to select a subset of
the solutions, for example, the smooth solutions, and then look
for the best solution within this subset. Commonly used methods
include Tikhonov regularization [83] and the maximum entropy
method [84] to handle this and other types of inversion [85]. Even
though there are well-established algorithms to perform numerical
Laplace inversion for NMR work [86–88], however, its use may not
be straightforward and requires experience. For example, the
choice of the optimal regularization parameter is nontrivial. This
is primarily due to the complex noise propagation in such an inver-
sion. It is thus useful to understand the essential mathematics in-
volved to better guide its application and be aware of its limitations.
5.1. General theory
The 1D Laplace inversion is to solve the following problem: gi-
ven a dataset M(s) of ﬁnite number of data points, determine Fð TÞ,
so that MðsÞ¼
R
e/C0 s=T Fð TÞdT, within the statistics of the noise.
Here T is the decay time constant. This equation can be approxi-
mated by a discretized matrix form:
M ¼ KF þ N; ð36Þ
where M and N are the data and noise vectors, matrices K, and F are
discretized version of the kernel, and Fð TÞ, respectively. Only M and
K are known. The true solution F should satisfy Eq. (36) by
kM /C0 KFk < r, where k/C1kis the vector norm and r the noise vari-
ance. However, given a ﬁnite SNR, many solutions satisfy this crite-
rion, and this is the source of the ill-conditioned nature of the
Laplace inversion.
The regularization method obtains a ﬁt to the data through
minimization of the following expression:
kM /C0 KFk2 þ akFk2; ð37Þ
The ﬁrst term measures the difference between the data and the ﬁt,
KF . The second term is a Tikhonov regularization and its amplitude
is controlled by the parameter a. The effect of this regularization
term is to select out a solution with a small 2-norm kFk2 and as a re-
sult a solution that is smooth and with fewer sharp spikes. However,
it may cause a bias to the result. When a is chosen such that the two
terms are comparable, the bias is considered minimized and the re-
sult is stable in the presence of noise [88,61]. When a is much smal-
ler, the resulting spectrum F can be spiky and sensitive to noise.
In order to accelerate the minimization of Eq. (37), the data and
the kernel can be compressed to a fewer number of variables using
singular value decomposition (SVD) of K,
K ¼ URVT ; ð38Þ
where R is a diagonal matrix with singular values in a descending
order, U and V are unitary matrices. VT denotes the transpose of ma-
trix V. For the exponential kernel, the singular values typically de-
cay quickly. We limit our algorithm to the subspace spanned by
typically fewer than 10 largest singular values. Such a subspace is
adequate for the limited signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio of the usual
experimental data. Using the SVD of K, Eq. (37) can be rewritten
in an identical structure but with a compressed data eM ¼ UT MU
and a kernel of much smaller size. Then, the optimization of Eq.
(37) is performed in this reduced space resulting in a greatly in-
creased inversion speed.
5.2. Fast Laplace Inversion – FLI
In fact, the 2D Laplace inversion, such as Eq. (12), can be cast into
the 1D form of Eq. (36). However, the size of the kernel matrix will
be huge. For example, aT1–T2 experiment may acquire 30T1-recovery
points and 8192 echoes for each recovery. Thus, assume that 100
points for T1 and T2 are used, respectively, the kernel will be a ma-
trix of (30 /C2 8192) /C2 10,000 with 2.5 /C2 109 elements. It is difﬁcult
to employ the commonly used SVD routine (such as that of Matlab)
to perform SVD on such a matrix on current desktop computers.
Thus the 1D algorithm cannot be used directly in practice.
Many 2D NMR experiments such as most of those outlined
earlier exhibit a unique kernel structure such that the full kernel
can be written as a product of two independent kernels:
kðx1; x2; R1; R2Þ¼ k1ðx1; R1Þk2ðx2; R2Þ: ð39Þ
Here x denotes experimental pulse sequence parameters (such as
delay time t), and R the spectral parameters (such as T1). For exam-
ple, the kernels for the T1–T2 experiment are
k1 ¼ 1 /C0 2 expð/C0 ta=T1Þð 40Þ
k2 ¼ expð/C0 tb=T2Þ: ð41Þ
Thus, if experiments are designed in such a way that the data can be
written in the form of a matrix M, Eq. (36) can be then put into the
following form:
M ¼ K1FKT
2 þ N: ð42Þ
Here M and N are the data and the noise in their 2D matrix form.
The matrix elements are deﬁned as ðK1Þij ¼ k1ðx1i; R1jÞ and
ðK2Þij ¼ k2ðx1i; R1jÞ.
Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24 19

--- PAGE 9 ---
The beneﬁt of this tensor product structure of the kernel is that
the SVD of K1 and K2 is quite manageable on current computers.
Once the SVD of K1 and K2 is obtained, the SVD of the product ma-
trix can be approximated. For example, the product of the singular
values of K1 and K2 will be the singular value of the product matrix
K. As a result, for a 2D experiment with similar SNR as a 1D exper-
iment, for example, SNR /C24 1000, then 50–100 singular values are
found to be useful for 2D inversion while typically fewer than 10
are found for 1D. Once the SVD of the combined kernel is obtained,
the 2D inversion problem (Eq. (42)) is converted to 1D (Eq. (36))
and the existing algorithms, e.g. Ref. [88] can be used directly.
The detailed mathematics are presented in Ref. [61,89].
5.3. Manual compression
There are other techniques to reduce the data size of a 1D, 2D or
3D experiment without using SVD. For example, one may choose to
use only a fraction of the data points to perform the inversion in
order to reduce the data size. However, this simple method will
miss a lot of signal. The so-called window-sum technique manually
compresses the CPMG data before optimization and it has been
used for Laplace inversion of up to 4D data [90–92].
The basic idea of the window-sum technique is to realize that for
a multi-exponential decay signal, the signal at time t is contributed
mostly by those signals with decay time constant close or longer
than time t. The signal of much shorter decay time constant has
essentially decayed away. This means that the signal does not have
a rapid time variation and the only potential time scale ist or longer.
Thus, a CPMG echo train data can be lumped into a series of bins, and
the data of each bin can be a sum (or a mean) of the original echoes.
As the decay time t increases, the size of the bin may increase too.
Sci ¼
Xni
j
Sj ð43Þ
where Sj is the jth (original) echo data, ni is the size of the ith bin,
and Sci is the compressed ith data. The corresponding compressed
kernel Kc is
Kcij ¼
Xni
k
Kkj ð44Þ
where Kkj was the original kernel. For example, for 1D inversion of
T2, Kkj = exp(/C0 tk/T2j). Now the compressed equation is
Sc ¼ Kc /C1F ð45Þ
and F is the same as in Eq. (36).
5.4. Maximum entropy method (MEM)
In addition to the method outlined in Section 5.2, maximum en-
tropy method has also been used for the MD Laplace inversion
[92,93]. The principle of maximum entropy (maxent) is that out
of all the solutions that satisfy the data equation, e.g. Eq. (36),
the most likely solution is the one that maximizes the entropy
function, S ¼/C0
R
Fð TÞ ln½F ðTÞ/C138dT, and Fð TÞ > 0. Thus the result is
FMEðTÞ¼ð 1=ZÞ exp
X
n
knSnVn
 !
; ð46Þ
where Z is a normalization constant, kn is the set of coefﬁcients cor-
responding to the solution F /C25 P
nknVn. Strictly speaking, Eq. (46) is
only true when the k’s are the solution, however, it can be used as a
recursive relationship to obtain the solution iteratively. Even
though the formal MEM solution appears to have avoided the regu-
larization parameter choice (e.g. FLI algorithm, Section 5.2), it how-
ever requires a predetermined number of singular values to be
included in the summation, Eq. (46), based on the SNR. It can be
shown that the regularization corresponds to a smooth cutoff of
the singular values, in contrast to the abrupt cutoff.
6. Challenges and new directions
The ﬁeld of MRPM is ultimately driven by its applications. How-
ever, the history has indicated that it is insufﬁcient to simply bor-
row methods and technologies developed for other NMR
applications. The material complexity as well as the unique
deployment requirement deserve dedicated R&D for this ﬁeld.
For example, the development of commercial well-logging tech-
nology is the result of many years of academic and commercial ef-
forts and resources in theory, instrumentation, and interpretation. I
will discuss a few directions of future research in three broad areas.
6.1. Theory and methods
Comparing to the complexity of porous media, our current
understanding of the pore space is still very limited. Using the lan-
guage of eigenmodes, NMR is essentially detecting the ground
state alone. For example, the relaxation experiments typically
measure the decay time constant of the ground state which is
determined by average SVR and not sensitive to pore shape. In a
porous rock, the pore space is typically characterized by a pore
body and pore throat which connects the pore bodies. The perme-
ability of a rock is highly dependent on pore throat size, which can
be very different from the average pore SVR. No current NMR
methods are capable to independently determine permeability
without laboratory calibration using core samples.
For the related ﬁeld of medical MRI, it is important to character-
ize tissue properties both in static structure and dynamics such as
blood ﬂow for pathological diagnostics and disease/treatment
monitoring. There has been extensive development in this area
such as DTI and DSI that have revolutionized our understanding
of brain structure, in particular the connectivity of tissues. Such
techniques should be applied to study inorganic porous media.
Another area of recent growth is numerical simulation of por-
ous media based on high-resolution X-ray tomography [94]. Rapid
improvement of X-ray equipment allows routine acquisition of 3D
tomography of porous materials down to 1–2
lm resolutions for a
sample of a few millimeter in size. However, geological samples
are often heterogeneous and larger samples are likely to contain
structures not present in smaller one. It is crucial that such numer-
ical technique can be scaled up to a few cc volume in order to have
a meaningful comparison with NMR data.
It is the opinion of this author that the following directions de-
serve more attention:
/C15Novel pulse sequence to detect pore structure
Pore orientation and anisotropy are important aspects of pore
space. DTI and DSI techniques could be applied to map the anisot-
ropy of pore space in order to better understand tortuosity and
permeability. Similarly, isotropy of diffusion coefﬁcient [95]
could allow better characterization of pore sizes and distribution.
A new class of experiments that uses two pairs of PFG pulses
(double-PFG) [96–98] has shown interesting features to charac-
terize isotropic and anisotropic pore space. Combining propaga-
tor and relaxation [99,100] is another interesting approach.
While diffusion is limited in the probing length scale, ﬂow will be
able to yield distance larger than grain sizes. Coupling ﬂow to
NMR propagator and other methods could be very interesting
to probe pore structure over a much large scale.
/C15Diffusion dynamics in real pore systems
We have argued that it is highly desirable to move beyond the
ground state and the concept of average SVR in order to
20 Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24

--- PAGE 10 ---
describe more details of the pore space. Combining the advance
in high-resolution X-ray tomography and high computing
power, it may be feasible now to perform numerical calculation
of the eigenmodes and understand the diffusion dynamics in
the 2D experiments such as T1–T2, and T2–T2, etc. These calcula-
tions could become the guide for more sophisticated experi-
ment as well as developing an interpretation of NMR results.
Even though the basic theory of diffusion dynamics can be for-
mulated and evaluated, interpretation of experimental results
from real materials remains challenging.
/C15Internal magnetic ﬁeld and its application
Compared to relaxation and diffusion, internal magnetic ﬁeld is
a relatively new piece of physics that is closely related to the
pore structure. Because it exhibits a strong correlation at the
pore size scale, it is unique and could be used to obtain pore
sizes. In addition, it can be used to excite the higher eigenmodes
[101].
/C15Inversion
Obtaining a spectrum of relaxation or diffusion is equally
important as inversion Fourier transform for spectroscopy.
However, the mathematics of Laplace inversion is more com-
plex and requires signiﬁcantly more computing resources. Also
due to the nonlinear nature of the inversion, the conventional
algorithms (based on the concept of regularization) only derive
one plausible solution and do not provide a measure of error
and uncertainty.
Statistics based methods (e.g. Monte Carlo [82] or Baysian
approaches [102]) obtain the statistics of the solution space
instead of picking a preferred spectrum as the ﬁnal solution.
Such statistics are only constrained by the data with no ad
hoc assumption of the properties of the solution (e.g. smooth-
ness). This type of approaches could become the new method
of choice for future Laplace inversion analysis.
6.2. Instrumentation
The use of NMR for geological materials often requires a ﬁeld-
worthy portable instrument. Robust and simple operation can be
critical for such exploration. In the past two decades, a variety of
designs and equipments have been demonstrated [1]. For example,
well-logging tools require the measurement volume to be signiﬁ-
cantly away from the instrument in order to isolate the unaffected
formation. This distance is often call DOI, distance or depth of
investigation. For an imaging device (such as NMR MOUSE), good
spatial resolution and high SNR are important requiring the use
of high ﬁeld permanent magnet and short DOI. Due to the diverse
nature of the applications, the requirement and design can be dras-
tically different. This is a signiﬁcant deviation from the conven-
tional NMR/MRI devices that are of only a few common designs.
For a well-logging device, larger DOI would be very desirable; on
the other hand for measurement of thin samples, such as surface
of paintings, skin, small DOI and high spatial resolution are the key.
Some of the common challenges of MRPM hardware are the
following:
/C15Magnet and design
High magnetic ﬁeld is often the solution to improve SNR of MR.
For inside-out NMR equipments employing permanent mag-
nets, the ﬁeld is limited to a few hundreds Gauss except for
those with very small DOI. Magnetic materials with larger mag-
netization would be highly desirable, such as superconducting
magnets. The practical use of superconductors would be a seri-
ous challenge for ﬁeld application and even more so for the high
temperature downhole environment. However, if there is a
breakthrough in miniaturized cryogenic coolers, it is conceiv-
able to include superconductors into the magnet design.
/C15RF design
RF efﬁciency of an inside-out NMR device is always poor due to
the extremely low ﬁlling factor. For example, a typical device
irradiates a large volume of space where the signal is only gen-
erated from a rather localized shell due to the presence of
strong magnetic ﬁeld gradient. Also the B
1 is much weaker at
the sample volume than at the surface of the RF probe. It is
highly desirable to focus the B1 ﬁeld to the sample volume only.
Such coil is likely to be much more complex than the simple
designs (solenoid, surface loops, etc.) currently in use.
/C15SNR and sensitivity
Inside-out NMR devices typically exhibit a strong ﬁeld gradient
and thus the detection volume is a thin shell, signiﬁcantly lim-
iting the SNR. Interestingly, a probe with lower Q may obtain
better SNR by enlarging the excitation and detection bandwidth
and thus sample volume. This is a scenario quite different from
the conventional NMR in uniform ﬁeld. As a result, a fully
broadband system (electronics and probe) may be seriously
advantageous. This then requires fully broadband electronics
(transmitter and receiver) as well as novel pulses for broadband
excitation.
/C15Surface NMR
Surface NMR (SNMR, or sometime called Magnetic Resonance
Sounding, MRS), developed from 1980s [103] is a method to
use the Earth magnetic ﬁeld as the static ﬁeld and deploys a
large coil (up to 100 m) at the surface to detect the signal from
the near-surface water body ( [104]). Compared to the sophisti-
cation of the conventional NMR/MRI, SNMR primarily uses sin-
gle-pulse FID. Two-pulse sequences have been recently used to
measure true T
2 [105] or T1 [106]. Development of further pulse
sequences and the associated hardware will undoubtedly be
critical.
/C15Laboratory NMR equipment
Simulating in situ conditions of porous media could be very
challenging in the lab. For example, a typical NMR system for
rock core measurement employs a core holder in order to apply
pressure and temperature to the sample while RF and gradient
coils are placed outside of the core holder [107]. Such a design
suffers a low ﬁlling factor when the required temperature and
pressure are high due to the space needed for a thick wall core
holder. Because only non-metallic materials can be used for
core holder in such design, the pressure speciﬁcation is limited.
Recent design of putting a RF coil inside the metallic pressure
housing is an important innovation to achieve signiﬁcant higher
pressure [108,109]. Compare to pressure, temperature is often a
more sensitive parameter determining the spin relaxation and
diffusion properties. However, most of the measurements
reported in the literature have not explored the temperature
dependence. This may be largely due to the lack of suitable
commercial sample holders that are designed for alleviated
temperatures.
6.3. Applications
The usefulness of MRPM is the ability to measure or infer non-
MR knowledge of the porous sample using MR methods. Thus it is
crucial to develop the connection between MR parameters with
material properties such as porosity, permeability, composition,
and ﬂuid–solid interactions, etc. Often such connection is built
via a combination of NMR development (e.g. pulse sequence de-
sign) and basic physical/chemical research.
/C15Pore shape and connectivity
Conventional relaxation and diffusion methods are able to char-
acterize the average SVR. Further details of the pore space can
be important to determine permeability and ﬂow properties,
Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24 21

--- PAGE 11 ---
they could also provide information on the geological processes
for the formation/alteration of the pores (sedimentation and
diagenesis). It could also impact the interpretation of other
measurements, such as electrical conductivity.
/C15Solid matrix
Most of the investigation of porous media is focused on the ﬂu-
ids inside the pore space. The mineral phase in fact is just as
important in understanding geological processes, mechanical
properties, and ﬂuid–solid interaction. However, it may be a
challenge to apply solid state NMR methods to such materials.
In addition to mineral composition, the physical shape and size
of the grains and their contact are very important parameters.
/C15Wetting, ﬂuid–solid interface, surface relaxivity
One key aspect of the physics governing the overall properties
of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled porous materials is the ﬂuid–solid interaction
at the solid surface. For example, the wetting condition (e.g. oil
or water wet) has a large impact on the amount of residue oil
left in a oil reservoir after initial production. It could be sensi-
tively dependent on the properties of both the ﬂuid and solid
phases. NMR surface relaxivity in fact is a sensitive tool to study
such interaction at the molecular scale.
/C15Temperature dependence
Many of the relaxation phenomena are temperature sensitive
due to the molecular interactions between the ﬂuid molecules
and with the surfaces. For example, bulk relaxation and surface
relaxivity can be temperature dependent. So is the diffusion
coefﬁcient of ﬂuids. Such temperature dependence is critical
for interpretation of NMR results for ﬂuid or PM properties. Fur-
thermore, the overall diffusion dynamics (Section 4) depend on
all such factors (diffusion coefﬁcient, surface relaxivity, bulk
relaxation). The literature on temperature dependence of MRPM
is in fact very limited [110,63].
/C15Flow
The non-invasive methods of NMR and MRI to probe inside an
opaque sample with molecular sensitivity is unrivaled in the
laboratory and in the ﬁeld. This is particularly true for the study
of ﬂuid ﬂow in porous media where majority of the literature on
such topics only monitors the efﬂuent discharge. For example,
models for ﬁltration can be tested directly by MRI of the trap-
ping phase. This can be particularly interesting for studying
transport of nano-size contaminants. Spatial conﬁguration and
network of the two ﬂuid phases is dependent on ﬂuid–ﬂuid,
ﬂuid-surface interactions and ﬂow history. Understanding of
such multi-phase system is very important to understand and
characterize oil production (such as EOR, enhanced oil recov-
ery).
Flow is also an important topic for biological systems such as
blood ﬂow, perfusion, oxygen and nutrient transport, tumor
growth, and drug delivery. Ideas and methods developed in
either ﬁeld could become inspiration for others. The complex
hierarchical structure of the blood vessel network will likely
prove to be as challenging as the multiphase ﬂow phenomenon
in inorganic porous media.
/C15Low-cost logging tools for prospecting water resource
MR well-logging is a well-established industry with signiﬁcant
commercial support for research, engineering and deployment.
Even though the same logging tools can be used in water
wells, the high cost of the instrument and their deployment
makes it inaccessible for water management. Compared to
the deep wells at temperatures up to 200 /C176C and pressure
2000 atm, the operating environment of a water well is benign
and the wells are much shallower (<200 m). A simpler MR log-
ging tool (e.g. Ref. [111,112]) and the associated inexpensive
deployment strategy could signiﬁcantly improve water
management.
7. Conclusion
MRPM touches many scientiﬁc disciplines both in its technical
development and applications. It has its roots in the molecular
interactions and dynamics and applications as diverse as modern
life itself, and it is built from the foundation of MR science, technol-
ogy, and methodology. In recent years, it has become clear that
simply borrowing from existing MR literature is insufﬁcient and
dedicated development for MRPM is required in order to address
the profound and distinct needs of the ﬁeld. This development will
inevitably include both new MR methodology as well as under-
standing the basic physics and chemistry of the materials.
References
[1] F. Casanova, J. Perlo, B. Blümich (Eds.), Single-Sided NMR, Springer, 2011.
[2] R.H. Varian, Ground Liquid Prospecting Method and Apparatus, US Patent
3019383.
[3] H.C. Torrey, Bloch equations with diffusion terms, Phys. Rev. 104 (1956) 563–
565.
[4] R.J.S. Brown, Distribution of ﬁelds from randomly placed dipoles: free-
precession signal decay as a result of magnetic grains, Phys. Rev. 121 (1961)
1379–1381.
[5] S.D. Senturia, J.D. Robinson, Nuclear spin lattice relaxation of liquid conﬁned
in porous solids, SPE J. 10 (3) (1970) 237–244.
[6] D.O. Seevers, A nuclear magnetic method for determining the permeability of
sandstones, Loggin Symp. Trans. 7 (1966) 1–14.
[7] J. Korringa, D.O. Seevers, H.C. Torrey, Theory of spin pumping and relaxation
in systems with a low concentration of electron spin resonance centers, Phys.
Rev. 127 (4) (1962) 1143–1150.
[8] H.C. Torrey, J. Korringa, D.O. Seevers, J. Uebersfeld, Magnetic spin pumping in
ﬂuids contained in porous media, Phys. Rev. Lett. 3 (9) (1959) 418–419.
[9] F. Bloch, Nuclear relaxation in gases by surface catalysis, Phys. Rev. 83 (5)
(1951) 1062–1063.
[10] R. Garwin, H. Reich, Self-diffusion and nuclear relaxation in He3, Phys. Rev.
115 (6) (1959) 1478–1492.
[11] M.H. Cohen, K.S. Mendelson, Nuclear magnetic relaxation and the internal
geometry of sedimentary rocks, J. Appl. Phys. 53 (1982) 1127–1135.
[12] P.G. de Gennes, Surface and interphase physics – excitation transfer in
random media, C.R. Acad. Sci. III 295 (1982) 1061–1064.
[13] K.R. Brownstein, C.E. Tarr, Spin-lattice relaxation in a system governed by
diffusion, J. Magn. Reson. 26 (1977) 17–24.
[14] K.R. Brownstein, C.E. Tarr, Importance of classical diffusion in nmr studies of
water in biological cells, Phys. Rev. A 19 (1979) 2446–2453.
[15] F. D’Orazio, S. Bhattacharja, W. Halperin, K. Eguchi, T. Mizusaki, Molecular
diffusion and nuclear-magnetic-resonance relaxation of water in unsaturated
porous silica glass, Phys. Rev. B, Condens. Matter 42 (16) (1990) 9810–9818.
[16] W.P. Halperin, F. D’Orazio, S. Bhattacharja, J.C. Tarczon, Magnetic resonance
relaxation analysis of porous media, in: J. Klafter, J. Drake (Eds.), Molecular
Dynamics in Restricted Geometries, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989.
[17] J. Karger, D. Ruthven, Diffusion in Zeolites and Other Microporous Solids, John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1992.
[18] W.E. Kenyon, Nuclear magnetic resonance as a petrophysical measurement,
Nucl. Geophys. 6 (1992) 153–171.
[19] D.E. Woessner, Nmr spin-echo self-diffusion measurements on ﬂuids
undergoing restricted diffusion, J. Phys. Chem. 67 (1963) 1365–1367.
[20] R.C. Wayne, R.M. Cotts, Nuclear-magnetic-resonance study of self-diffusion in
a bounded medium, Phys. Rev. 151 (1966) 264–272.
[21] L.L. Latour, P.P. Mitra, R.L. Kleinberg, C.H. Sotak, Time-dependent diffusion
coefﬁcient of ﬂuids in porous media as a probe of surface-to-volume ratio, J.
Magn. Reson. Ser. A 101 (1993) 342–346.
[22] P.P. Mitra, P.N. Sen, L.M. Schwartz, Short-time behavior of the diffusion
coefﬁcient as a geometrical probe of porous media, Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993)
8565–8574.
[23] P.P. Mitra, P.N. Sen, L.M. Schwartz, P. Le Doussal, Diffusion propagator as a
probe of the structure of porous media, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 (1992) 3555–3558.
[24] L.L. Latour, K. Svoboda, P.P. Mitra, C.H. Sotak, Time-dependent diffusion of
water in a biological model system, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91 (4) (1994) 1229–
1233.
[25] P.T. Callaghan, A. Coy, D. MacGowan, K.J. Packer, F.O. Zelaya, Diffraction-like
effects in nmr diffusion studies of ﬂuids in porous solids, Nature 351 (1991)
467.
[26] P.T. Callaghan, A. Coy, T.P.J. Halpin, K.J. Packer, F.O. Zelay, Diffusion in porous
systems and the inﬂuence of pore morphology in pulsed gradient spin-echo
nuclear magnetic resonance studies, J. Chem. Phys. 97 (1992) 651–662.
[27] J.A. Jackson, L.J. Burnett, J.F. Harmon, Remote (inside-out) NMR. III. Detection
of nuclear magnetic resonance in a remotely produced region of
homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld, J. Magn. Reson. 41 (3) (1980) 411–421 (1969).
[28] J.A. Jackson, Los alamos NMR well logging project, Concepts Magn. Reson. 13
(6) (2001) 368–378.
22 Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24

--- PAGE 12 ---
[29] R.L. Kleinberg, J.A. Jackson, An introduction to the history of nmr well logging,
Concepts Magn. Reson. 13 (6) (2001) 340–342.
[30] R.L. Kleinberg, Well logging, in: D.M. Grant, R.K. Harris (Eds.), Encyclopedia of
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.
[31] R.L. Kleinberg, Methods in the Physics of Porous Media, vol. 35, Academic
Press, 1999.
[32] C. Pierpaoli, P. Jezzard, P.J. Basser, A. Barnett, G. Di Chiro, Diffusion tensor MR
imaging of the human brain, Radiology 201 (3) (1996) 637–648.
[33] V.J. Wedeen, P. Hagmann, W.-Y.I. Tseng, T.G. Reese, R.M. Weisskoff, Mapping
complex tissue architecture with diffusion spectrum magnetic resonance
imaging, Magn. Reson. Med. 54 (6) (2005) 1377–1386. doi: 10.1002/
mrm.2064.
[34] D.W. McCall, D.C. Douglass, E.W. Anderson, Diffusion in ethylene polymers.
IV, J. Chem. Phys. 30 (3) (1959) 771–773.
[35] R. Bachus, R. Kimmich, Molecular weight and temperature dependence of
self-diffusion coefﬁcients in polyethylene and polystyrene melts investigated
using a modiﬁed N.M.R. ﬁeld-gradient technique, Polymer 24 (1983) 964.
[36] E. von Meerwall, S. Beckman, J. Jang, W.L. Mattice, Diffusion of liquid n-
alkanes: free-volume and density effects, J. Chem. Phys. 108 (10) (1998)
4299–4304.
[37] D. Freed, L. Burcaw, Y.-Q. Song, Scaling laws for diffusion coefﬁcients in
mixtures of alkanes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 067602.
[38] D. Freed, Dependence on chain length of nmr relaxation times in mixtures of
alkanes, J. Chem. Phys. 126 (2007) 174502.
[39] R.L. Kleinberg, H. MA, Transverse relaxation processes in porous sedimentary
rock, J. Magn. Reson. 88 (1) (1990) 9–19.
[40] R.L. Kleinberg, W.E. Kenyon, P.P. Mitra, Mechanism of NMR relaxation of
ﬂuids in rock, J. Magn. Reson. Ser. A 108A (2) (1994) 206–214.
[41] S. Stapf, R. Kimmich, R.O. Seitter, Proton and deuteron ﬁeld-cycling NMR
relaxometry of liquids in porous glasses: evidence for Lévy–Walk statistics,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (15) (1995) 2855–2858.
[42] R. Kimmich, E. Anoardo, Field-cycling NMR relaxometry, Prog. Nucl. Magn.
Reson. Spectrosc. 44 (3-4) (2004) 257–320.
[43] S. Godefroy, J.-P. Korb, M. Fleury, R. Bryant, Surface nuclear magnetic
relaxation and dynamics of water and oil in macroporous media, Phys. Rev.
E Stat. nonlinear Soft Matter Phys. 64 (2) (2001) 021605.
[44] Y.-Q. Song, L. Zielinski, S. Ryu, Two-dimensional NMR of diffusion systems,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (24) (2008) 248002.
[45] A.T. de Hoop, M.D. Prange, Variational analysis of the natural decay rates and
eigenmodes of cavity-enclosed diffusive ﬁelds, J Phys. A: Math. Theor. 40 (41)
(2007) 12463–12477. < http://stacks.iop.org/1751-8121/40/1246>.
[46] Y.-Q. Song, B.M. Goodson, B. Sheridan, T.M. de Swiet, A. Pines, Effects of
diffusion on magnetic resonance imaging of laser-polarized xenon gas, J.
Chem. Phys. 108 (15) (1998) 6233–6239, http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.476030.
[47] K.J. Packer, C. Rees, Pulsed NMR studies of restricted diffusion. I. Droplet size
distributions in emulsions, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 40 (2) (1972) 206–
218.
[48] J.C. Van den Enden, D. Waddington, H. Van Aalst, C.G. Van Kralingen, K.J.
Packer, Rapid determination of water droplet size distributions by PFG-NMR,
J, Colloid Interface Sci. 140 (1) (1990) 105–113.
[49] P.N. Sen, Time-dependent diffusion coefﬁcient as a probe of geometry,
Concepts Magn. Reson. Part A 23A (1) (2004) 1–21. < http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/cmr.a.20017>.
[50] D. Grebenkov, NMR survey of the reﬂected brownian motion, Rev. Mod. Phys.
79 (3) (2007) 1077–1137.
[51] R.J.S. Brown, P. Fantazzini, Conditions for initial quasilinear 1/ t
2 versus s for
carr-purcell-meiboom-gill nmr with diffusion and susceptibility differences
in porous media and tissues, Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993) 14823–14834.
[52] R.M. Weisskoff, C.S. Zuo, J.L. Boxerman, B.R. Rosen, Microscopic susceptibility
variation and transverse relaxation: theory and experiment, Magn. Reson.
Med. 31 (1994) 601–610.
[53] G.C. Borgia, R.J.S. Brown, P. Fantazzini, Scaling of spin-echo amplitudes with
frequency, diffusion coefﬁcient, pore size, and susceptibility difference for the
nmr of ﬂuids in porous media and biological tissues, Phys. Rev. E 51 (1995)
2104–2114.
[54] M.D. Hürlimann, Effective gradients in porous media due to susceptibility
differences, J. Magn. Reson. 131 (1998) 232–240.
[55] B. Audoly, P.N. Sen, S. Ryu, Y.-Q. Song, Correlation functions for
inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld in random media with application to a
dense random pack of spheres, J. Magn. Reson. 164 (2003) 154–159.
[56] H. Cho, Y.-Q. Song, NMR measurement of the magnetic ﬁeld correlation
function in porous media, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2) (2008) 025501.
[57] Y.-Q. Song, S. Ryu, P.N. Sen, Determining multiple length scales in rocks,
Nature (London) 406 (2000) 178–181.
[58] E.E. Sigmund, H. Cho, P. Chen, S. Byrnes, Y.-Q. Song, X. Guo, T. Brown,
Diffusion-based mr methods for bone structure and evolution, Magn. Reson.
Med. 59 (2008) 28–39.
[59] P.J. Basser, J. Mattiello, D. LeBihan, Estimation of the effective self-diffusion
tensor from the NMR spin echo, J. Magn. Reson. Ser. B 103 (3) (1994) 247–
254.
[60] A.E. English, K.P. Whittall, M.L.G. Joy, R.M. Henkelman, Quantitative two-
dimensional time correlation relaxometry, Magn. Reson. Med 22 (1991) 425–
434.
[61] Y.-Q. Song, L. Venkataramanan, M.D. Hurlimann, M. Flaum, P. Frulla, C.
Straley, T
1–T2 correlation spectra obtained using a fast two-dimensional
laplace inversion, J. Magn. Reson. 154 (2002) 261–268.
[62] M.D. Hürlimann, M. Flaum, L. Venkataramanan, C. Flaum, R. Freedman, G.J.
Hirasaki, Diffusion-relaxation distribution functions of sedimentary rocks in
different saturation states, Magn. Reson. Imaging 21 (2003) 269–277.
[63] A. Mutina, M. Hurlimann, Correlation of transverse and rotational diffusion
coefﬁcient: a probe of chemical composition in hydrocarbon oils, J. Phys.
Chem. A 112 (15) (2008) 3291–3301.
[64] J.-H. Lee, C. Labadie, C.S. Springer Jr, G.S. Harbison, Two-dimensional inverse
laplace transform nmr: altered relaxation times allow detection of exchange
correlation, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115 (1993) 7761–7764.
[65] P.L. Hubbard, K.M. McGrath, P.T. Callaghan, A study of anisotropic water self-
diffusion and defects in the lamellar mesophase, Langmuir 21 (2005) 4340–
4346.
[66] L. Monteilhet, J.-P. Korb, J. Mitchell, P.J. McDonald, Observation of exchange of
micropore water in cement pastes by two-dimensional T
2–T2 nuclear
magnetic resonance relaxometry, Phys. Rev. E 74 (6) (2006) 061404.
[67] M. Hurlimann, L. Burcaw, Y.-Q. Song, Quantitative characterization of food
products by two-dimensional D–T2 and T1–T2 distribution functions in a static
gradient, J Colloid Interface Sci. 297 (2005) 303–311.
[68] B. Hills, Applications of low-ﬁeld nmr to food science, Annu. Rep. NMR
Spectrosc. 58 (2006) 177–230.
[69] M.D. Hürlimann, L. Venkataramanan, C. Flaum, P. Speier, C. Karmonik, R.
Freedman, N. Heaton, Diffusion-editing: new nmr measurement of saturation
and pore geometry, in: 43rd Annual SPWLA meeting in Oiso, Japan, 2002, p.
paper FFF.
[70] K.E. Washburn, P.T. Callaghan, Tracking pore to pore exchange using
relaxation exchange spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (17) (2006) 175502.
[71] E.O. Stejskal, J.E. Tanner, Spin diffusion measurements: spin echoes in the
presence of a time-dependent ﬁeld gradient, J. Chem. Phys. 42 (1965) 288–
292.
[72] M.D. Hürlimann, L. Venkataramanan, Quantitative measurement of two-
dimensional distribution functions of diffusion and relaxation in grossly
inhomogeneous ﬁelds, J. Magn. Reson. 157 (2002) 31–42.
[73] M.D. Hürlimann, L. Venkataramanan, C. Flaum, The diffusion-spin relaxation
time distribution as an experimental probe to characterize ﬂuid mixtures in
porous media, J. Chem. Phys. 117 (2002) 10223–10232.
[74] R.L. Kleinberg, A. Sezginer, D.D. Grifﬁn, M. Fukuhara, Novel nmr apparatus for
investigating an external sample, J. Magn. Reson. 97 (1992) 466–485.
[75] P.M. Glover, P.S. Aptaker, J.R. Bowler, E. Ciampi, P.J. McDonald, A novel high-
gradient permanent magnet for the proﬁling of planar ﬁlms and coatings, J.
Magn. Reson. 139 (1999) 90–97.
[76] G. Eidmann, R. Savelsberg, P. Blumler, B. Blümich, The nmr mouse, a mobile
universal surface explorer, J. Magn. Reson. A 122 (1996) 104–109.
[77] M. Kac, Can one hear the shape of a drum?, Am Math. Mon. 73 (1966) 1.
[78] S. Sridhar, A. Kudrolli, Experiments on not ‘‘hearing the shape’’ of drums,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994) 2175–2178.
[79] D.S. Grebenkov, Laplacian eigenfunctions in NMR.I. A numerical tool,
Concepts Magn. Reson. Part A 32A (4) (2008) 277–301.
[80] L.J. Zielinski, Y.-Q. Song, S. Ryu, P.N. Sen, Characterization of coupled pore
systems from the diffusion eigenspectrum, J. Chem. Phys. 117 (2002) 5361–
5365.
[81] D. Bytchenkoff, S. Rodts, Structure of the two-dimensional relaxation spectra
seen within the eigenmode perturbation theory and the two-site exchange
model, J. Magn. Reson. 208 (1) (2011) 4–19.
[82] M. Prange, Y.-Q. Song, Quantifying uncertainty in NMR T
2 spectra using
monte carlo inversion, J. Magn. Reson. 196 (1) (2009) 54–60, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmr.2008.10.008.
[83] A.N. Tikhonov, V.Y. Arsenin, Solutions of Ill-Posed Problems, John Wiley and
Sons, New York, 1977.
[84] J. Skilling, Classic maximum entropy, in: J. Skilling (Ed.), Maximum Entropy
and Bayesian Methods, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1989, pp. 45–52.
[85] C.L. Lawson, R.J. Hanson, Solving Least Squares Problems, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1974.
[86] S.W. Provencher, Contin: a general purpose constrained regularization
program for inverting noisy linear algebraic and integral equations,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 27 (1982) 229.
[87] G.C. Borgia, R.J.S. Brown, P. Fantazzini, Uniform-penalty inversion of
multiexponential decay data, J. Magn. Reson. 132 (1998) 65–77.
[88] E.J. Fordham, A. Sezginer, L.D. Hall, Imaging multiexponential relaxation in
the ( y, log t
1) plane, with application to clay ﬁltration in rock cores, J. Magn.
Reson. Ser. A 113 (1995) 139–150.
[89] L. Venkataramanan, Y.-Q. Song, M.D. Hürlimann, Solving fredholm integrals of
the ﬁrst kind with tensor product structure in 2 and 2.5 dimensions, IEEE
Trans. Signal Proc. 50 (2002) 1017–1026.
[90] R. Freedman, Method and Apparatus for Compressing Data Produced from a
Well Tool in a Wellbore Prior to Transmitting the Compressed Data Uphole to
a Surface Apparatus, US Patent 5381092.
[91] R. Freedman, C. Morriss, Processing of data from an nmr logging tool, SPE
30560.
[92] N.J. Heaton, C. Cao Minh, J. Kovats, U. Guru, Saturation and viscosity from
multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance logging, Soc Petro Eng J paper
90564. doi:10.2118/90564-MS.
[93] N.J. Heaton, Multi-Measurement NMR Analysis Based on Maximum Entropy,
US Patent 6960913 B2 (2005) 1–15.
[94] A. Sakellariou, C.H. Arns, A.P. Sheppard, R.M. Sok, H. Averdunk, A. Limaye, A.C.
Jones, T.J. Senden, M.A. Knackstedt, Developing a virtual materials laboratory,
Mater. Today 10 (12) (2007) 44–51.
Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24 23

--- PAGE 13 ---
[95] S. Mori, P. Van Zijl, Diffusion weighting by the trace of the diffusion tensor
within a single scan, Magn. Reson. Med. 33 (1) (1995) 41–52.
[96] P. Mitra, Multiple wave-vector extensions of the NMR pulsed-ﬁeld-gradient
spin-echo diffusion measurement, Phys. Rev. B, Condens. Matter 51 (21)
(1995) 15074–15078.
[97] P.T. Callaghan, M.E. Komlosh, Locally anisotropic motion in a macroscopically
isotropic system: displacement correlations measured using double pulsed
gradient spin-echo nmr, Magn. Reson. Chem. 40 (13) (2002) S15–S19.
[98] N. Shemesh, E. Özarslan, M.E. Komlosh, P.J. Basser, Y. Cohen, From single-
pulsed ﬁeld gradient to double-pulsed ﬁeld gradient MR: gleaning new
microstructural information and developing new forms of contrast in MRI,
NMR in Biomed. 23 (7) (2010) 757–780.
[99] K. Washburn, P. Callaghan, Propagator resolved transverse relaxation
exchange spectroscopy, J. Magn. Reson. 186 (2) (2007) 337–340, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmr.2007.02.011.
[100] L.M. Burcaw, M.W. Hunter, P.T. Callaghan, Propagator-resolved 2D exchange
in porous media in the inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld, J. Magn. Reson. 205
(2) (2010) 209–215.
[101] Y.-Q. Song, Detection of the high eigenmodes of spin diffusion in porous
media, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 3878–3881.
[102] D.J. Holland, A. Blake, A.B. Tayler, A.J. Sederman, L.F. Gladden, A Bayesian
approach to characterising multi-phase ﬂows using magnetic resonance:
Application to bubble ﬂows, J. Magn. Reson. 209 (1) (2011) 83–87.
[103] A.G. Semenov, A.Y. Pusep, M.D. Schirov, Hydroscope–an installation for
prospecting without drilling, USSR Acad. Sci., Novosibirsk (Russian)
(1982) 1–26.
[104] A. Legchenko, P. Valla, A review of the basic principles for proton magnetic
resonance sounding measurements, J. Appl. Geophys. 50 (2002) 3–19.
[105] A. Legchenko, J.-M. Vouillamoz, J. Roy, Application of the magnetic resonance
sounding method to the investigation of aquifers in the presence of magnetic
materials, Geophysics 75 (6) (2010) L91.
[106] J.O. Walbrecker, M. Hertrich, J.A. Lehmann-Horn, A.G. Green, Estimating the
longitudinal relaxation time T1 in surface NMR, Geophysics 76 (2) (2011)
F111.
[107] R. Chen, P. Stallworth, S. Greenbaum, R. Kleinberg, Proton and deuteron
magnetic resonance of water in natural rock and artiﬁcial porous media:
effects of hydrostatic pressure, J. Magn. Reson. Ser. A 110 (1994) 77.
[108] R. Freedman, K. Ganesan, D.W. Grant, High Pressure/High Temperature
Magnetic Resonance Tool, US Patent (7683613 B2).
[109] H. Han, M. Ouellette, B. MacMillan, F. Goora, R. MacGregor, D. Green, B.J.
Balcom, High pressure magnetic resonance imaging with metallic vessels, J.
Magn. Reson. 213 (1) (2011) 90–97.
[110] L. Latour, R. Kleinberg, A. Sezginer, Nuclear magnetic resonance properties of
rocks at elevated temperatures, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 150 (1992) 535.
[111] D. Walsh, E. Grunewald, P. Turner, I. Frid, Javel: a slimhole and microhole
NMR logging tool, Fast Times 15 (3) (2010) 67–72.
[112] R. Knight, E. Grunewald, T. Irons, K. Dlubac, Y.-Q. Song, H.N. Bachman, B. Grau,
D. Walsh, J.D. Abraham, J. Cannia, Field experiment provides ground truth for
surface nuclear magnetic resonance measurement, Geophys. Res. Lett. 39 (3)
(2012) L03304.
24 Y.-Q. Song / Journal of Magnetic Resonance 229 (2013) 12–24