--- PAGE 1 ---
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling
Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples1
E. Toumelin2, C. Torres-Verdín2, S. Chen3, and D. M. Fischer4
INTRODUCTION
Pore structures of carbonate rocks are known to be much
more difficult to quantify than those of sandstones. The
genesis of carbonate rocks is commonly associated with
both chemical and biological processes that can cause large
variations of pore size, shape, texture, and degree of disso-
lution/cementation. Carbonate rocks also exhibit a large
degree of heterogeneity in the form of (a) partially isolated
pores and (b) presence of both intra- and inter-granular
pores. Petrographic or standard core analysis techniques
often face serious technical difficulties in determining
whether or not an existing “vug” is hydraulically isolated
from the rest of the pore structure. Similarly, it is difficult to
identify in the laboratory whether secondary, inter-
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 91
PETROPHYSICS, VOL. 44, NO. 2 (MARCH-APRIL 2003); P. 91–107; 17 FIGURES, 4 TABLES
ABSTRACT
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) is the only log-
ging technique sensitive to pore-size distribution and pore
structure. However, quantitative interpretation of NMR
data can become uncertain in carbonate rocks because of
unaccounted diffusion coupling between existing pore
scales. The objective of this study is to assess the relative
importance of diffusion coupling and temperature on
NMR measurements performed on a few carbonate sam-
ples.
The core of our work is based on the analysis of experi-
mental NMR measurements and on the use of numerical
simulations. The numerical simulation algorithm consists
of Monte-Carlo random walks in three dimensions and
accounts for two-phase fluid saturations in the presence of
a bimodal pore-size distribution. NMR coupling effects
are modeled by including simple cross-interactions
between the fluids within the different types of pores. We
present a method based on rock image analysis to calibrate
the numerical model to NMR laboratory measurements
acquired in complex carbonate rocks at two stages of fluid
saturation. The derived simulation models are subse-
quently used to generate equivalent decoupled responses
of the samples. Comparison of these decoupled responses
with experimental data allows one to assess the effect of
diffusion coupling. The experimental data were also used
to quantify the temperature dependence of NMR measure-
ments and movable fluid volumes, normally determined
assuming either a constant a priori formationT2cutoff, or
else parameters derived at ambient temperature. Finally,
an analysis is made of the sensitivity of conventional per-
meability models to the combined effects of temperature
and diffusion coupling, as evidenced by the core samples
considered in this paper.
Manuscript received by the Editor October 21, 2002; revised manuscript received January 27, 2003.1Originally presented at the SPWLA 43rd Annual Logging Symposium, June 2–5, 2002, Oiso, Japan, Paper JJJ.2The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA3Baker Atlas, Houston, TX USA4Baker Atlas Inteq, Celle, Germany
©2003 Society of Professional Well Log Analysts. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE 2 ---
connected micropores provide significant diffusive connec-
tivity to the overall pore network. The detection and quanti-
fication of such structural properties and of their impact on
pore connectivity and fluid transport is essential to the char-
acterization of carbonate reservoir quality and producibil-
ity.
As the only logging technique currently available to
characterize pore size distributions, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) logging has been used to assess a hand-
ful of key petrophysical parameters, such as irreducible
bulk volume (BVI), clay-bound water volume (CBW),
movable bulk volume (BVM), effective ( /c102e)a n dt o t a l
porosity (/c102T), and permeability index (k). All of these
parameters are related to the amount and the distribution of
the fluids within the pore structure. Thus, an understanding
of how NMR measurements respond to variations of pore
structure is essential to quantify petrophysical formation
properties.
Most of the currently available NMR interpretation mod-
els and parameters thereof, such asT2cutoff,s p e c t r a lB V I ,
CBW, and Timur-Coates permeability index, are based on
the concept of pore-size distributions. This concept is most
suitable in cases where a deterministic relationship exists
between pore size and throat size. Although these models
have been applied successfully to the interpretation of sand-
stones, and to some extent of carbonates, modifications are
often required to accommodate local geological and petro-
physical knowledge. Some modifications are empirical
(Quintero et al., 1999; Allen et al., 2001), while others stem
from more fundamental considerations (Ramakrishnan et
al., 1999; Godefroy et al., 2001).
METHODOLOGY
Even though large variations are expected in the spatial
distribution of pores in carbonates, it is important to quan-
tify their effect on both petrophysical properties and log
interpretation. The main thrust of this paper is to report a
thorough analysis performed on a few carbonate samples of
the dependence of NMR measurements on temperature and
diffusion coupling. We carry out this analysis by using
NMR measurements at different temperatures and numeri-
cal simulations that take into account diffusion coupling
and temperature effects. This paper is organized as follows.
First, we briefly describe the three main core samples used
in our study with emphasis on their pore structure and their
propensity to exhibit diffusion coupling. Subsequently, we
describe the NMR experimental protocol used to obtain
core measurements at different temperatures and fluid satu-
rations. We then summarize the numerical algorithm used to
model the NMR response in the presence of bimodal,
micro-porous carbonate rocks. We show how both the NMR
measurements and the petrographic analysis can be synthe-
sized into a parametric numerical model of bimodal poros-
ity capable of describing the pore complexity exhibited by
the core samples. The effect of temperature on NMR meas-
urements is then investigated, and the comparison between
numerical simulations and experimental measurements is
extended to explore the role played by temperature in diffu-
sive coupling. Lastly, cumulative porosity curves derived
from both NMR experiments and numerical simulations are
used to assess the BVI errors that come from usingT2cutoffs
that are independent of temperature and diffusive coupling.
We conclude by studying the stability of the conventional
permeability models to the presence of temperature varia-
tions in the measured rocks, and the need to correctT2cutoff
values in log analysis when neither temperature nor diffu-
sion coupling are negligible.
PORE STRUCTURE OF THE SAMPLES
The three samples considered in this paper are com-
pacted, micritized limestones retrieved from the same well
but exhibiting different facies. Back Scattered Electron
(BSE) imaging was used to analyze the pore structure of
these samples (Prior et al., 1999) and to measure pore-size
distributions and porosities,/c102BSE,f o rp o r e sl a r g e rt h a n2
microns. Scattering Electron Microscope (SEM) was also
used to provide high-resolution spatial images of the pore-
matrix structure (Anselmetti et al., 1998). A complementary
laboratory core-plug measurement was performed to assess
total porosity/c102T,w h i c hi nt u r na l l o w e dt h eq u a n t i f i c a t i o no f
micro-porosity otherwise unaccounted by the BSE analysis,
i.e.,/c102micro=/c102r–/c102BSE.
Pore geometry analysis helped to identify several pore
types, or pore modes, within the samples, namely:
•Mode 1: Large primary inter-connected pores with aver-
age diameters larger than 60/c109m. Pores exhibit variable
cementation, thereby providing partial diffusion coupling
with the surrounding micro-porosity region.
•Mode 2: Large secondary dissolution pores, with aver-
age diameters within the range of 20-60/c109m. These pores
are largely hydraulically isolated and hence remain
uncoupled to other pore modes.
•Mode 3: These are pores developed between circum-
granular cement crystals ranging in diameter from 5 to 15
/c109m. Due to their proximity to smaller micro-porosity
regions, they can be regarded as coupled with the latter.
•Mode 4: These pores exhibit diameters of 0.5/c109m or less
and therefore constitute the micro-porosity associated
with/c102micro. They are developed within the matrix and
contain irreducible water.
Porosities and average radii of pore modes 1 through 3
92 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.

--- PAGE 3 ---
were quantified using the pore-size distribution estimated
via BSE analysis. In terms of pore-size distributions, the
main features of the samples are as follows:
•Sample Amostly exhibits a combination of small-size
(modes 3 and 4) diffusively coupled porosities amount-
ing to 13.6% of the bulk volume, with 10% vuggy (mode
2), isolated macro-porosity. An example of this pore
structure is provided by the SEM images shown in Figure
1, where one can easily recognize abundant micro-
porosity as well as a few isolated vugs. The high degree
of diffusion coupling is likely, since the thin sections
(Figure 2) show that most of the calcite-free micro-pore
space clearly imbibes epoxy. The measured permeability
to water is low, equal to 4 mD.
•Sample Bmainly consists of 8.1% primary macro-
porosity (mode 1) partially coupled with 5.1% micro-
porosity (mode 4), in addition to 5% isolated secondary
macro-porosity (mode 2). As shown by the SEM images
of Figure 3, this sample exhibits a dual porosity charac-
terized by the remarkable structural organization of
matrix grains into intrinsically micro-porous packs. The
thin sections of Figure 4 show partial imbibition of epoxy
into the intragranular micro-porosity. The measured per-
meability of sample B to water is 70 mD.
•Sample Cexhibits the highest macro-porosity among the
three samples reported in this section. The major part of
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 93
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples
FIG.1 SEM images of sample A at 140x (a) and 1400x (b)
magnification. These pictures show the extensive micritization
of the rock matrix and the isolation of scarce macro-pores.
There is no appreciable amount of cement to prevent contact
between intra- and intergranular pore spaces.
FIG.2 Thin section images from sample A. Except for calcite-
bearing areas (shown in white on the pictures), epoxy has been
consistently imbibed by the micro-porous matrix.

--- PAGE 4 ---
the porosity is associated with primary macro-porosity
regions of mode 1 (17% porosity), while the remaining
4% porosity is evenly distributed among the remaining
three pore modes. The SEM images of Figure 5 show the
structure of the macro-porosity and suggest good cemen-
tation along the macro-pore surfaces. This cementation
explains the impermeability of the micro-porosity to
epoxy (Figure 6). The highly connected macro-pore
structure explains the relatively high value of the meas-
ured water permeability, equal to 980 mD.
As illustrated in Figure 7, the BSE-based pore-size distri-
bution allowed us to identify pore modes 1 through 3. The
SEM images were then used to estimate the micro-pore size
(mode 4) in the range of 0.2 to 0.5/c109m.
NMR EXPERIMENTS
Nuclear magnetic resonance measurements of the three
core samples were performed with a MARAN ULTRA sys-
tem operating at a frequency of 2.3 MHz. The samples were
first measured with 100% water saturation (Sw=1 )a td i f f e r-
ent temperatures between 4 and 65ºC (4, 22, 45, and 65ºC
for samples A and C; 10, 22, 45, and 60ºC for sample B).
Subsequently, the same samples were desaturated to
their irreducible water saturation (Swir)s t a t eb yc e n t r i f u g a-
tion. The pressure applied to the samples during centrifuga-
tion was equal to 60 psi (414 kPa) during 24 hours or more.
94 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.
FIG.3 SEM images of sample B at 140x (a) and 1400x (b)
magnification. Macro-porosity and general agglomeration of
grains into packs are well defined in the images. The images
also indicate the presence of cementation crystals at the limit of
some micritized grain packs (macro-pore surface).
FIG.4 Thin sections from sample B exhibiting partial epoxy
imbibition by the micro-porous regions.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Moreover, it was assumed that all moveable water had been
removed when the measured expelled water volume was
observed to be stable for 8 hours. All NMR measurements
for the irreducible water saturated samples were acquired at
regulated room temperature (22ºC).
AC P M Gs e q u e n c ew a su s e dt oo b t a i ne c h ot r a i n so fu p
to 5000 echoes with even time spacing,TE,o f1m sa n di n
the absence of a magnetic field gradient. Measurements
were repeated and stacked to ensure signal-to-noise ratios
greater than 100. We made use of a discrete, multi-
exponential relaxation model with a sufficiently wideT2bin
range to invert the echo trains into transverse relaxation (T2)
distributions. The inversion technique employs a
curvature-smoothing regularization (Chen et al., 1999) to
stabilize the solutions in the presence of noise. Figure 8
shows theT2distributions obtained from NMR measure-
ments performed atSw=1a n dSwirfor each of the three core
samples.
NMR SIMULATION MODEL
The algorithm used to simulate numerically the NMR
response of fluid-filled carbonate rocks replicates a condi-
tional Monte Carlo random-walk procedure. Conceptually,
the diffusive coupling model and the dual random-walk
algorithm are a generalization of the algorithm reported by
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 95
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples
FIG.5 SEM images of sample C at 140x (a) and 1400x (b)
magnification. The structure in panel (a) has the same appear-
ance as that of sample B, although the BSE analysis shows that
large pores are more numerous in sample C. The high density of
calcite crystals provides strong cementation of the macro-
pores.
FIG.6 Thin sections from sample C showing no imbibition of
epoxy outside the macro-porous regions.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ramakrishnan et al. (1999). However, instead of modeling
the NMR response as a histogram of walked times, our
algorithm simulates the CPMG echo decay in the time
domain. This approach requires tracking of the NMR signal
phase evolution resulting from both the random walk and
the assumed NMR pulse sequence.
Model geometry
The simulation model was constructed with a three-
dimensional (3D) bimodal pack of spheres intended to rep-
licate the pore-structure geometry of carbonate formations,
in which micro-grains are arranged into packs. As in the
example of Figure 3, the simulation model accounts for
intra-granular porosity regions that constitute the grain
packs, while different types of inter-granular porosity (char-
acterized by different pore sizes and degrees of cementa-
tion, depending on diagenesis) exist between the packs. The
geometrical construction of the 3D model is based on the
following assumptions:
•Bimodal pore-size distribution,
•Periodic geometry,
•Isotropic pores,
•Spherical, compacted micro-grains, and
•Spherical, compacted grain packs.
At the micro- (macro-) scale, each grain (grain pack) is
constructed with a sphere inscribed into a concentric cubic
cell. If the sphere does not completely fill its cubic unit, then
the complementary volume is considered filled with fluids.
Furthermore, fixed blobs of gas centered on the macro-pore
space can be included in the model to represent partial satu-
rations of an immiscible non-wetting gas phase, while the
micro-porosity can only be filled with wetting fluid. Figure
9s h o w sa3 Dp e r i o do ft h i sb i m o d a lp o r e - n e t w o r ks t r u c t u r e .
Aw i d ev a r i e t yo fp o r es i z e sc a nb em o d e l e db ya d j u s t i n gt h e
values of the grain (or grain pack) radii, and the sizes of the
corresponding cubic cell.
Random-walk algorithm
At each iteration of the Monte Carlo simulation proce-
dure, a fictitious proton is randomly chosen within the space
formed by the available pore volume. This proton is then
96 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.
FIG.8 T2distributions of NMR measurements performed at
ambient temperature on samples A, B, and C. Dashed curves
represent the measurements at irreducible water saturation.
Solid curves represent measurements performed at 100%
water saturation.
FIG.7 Pore-size modes recognized in samples A, B and C.
Plain stems correspond to coupled porosity modes, dash
stems, to partially coupled primary porosity, and dot stems to
a-priori uncoupled vuggy porosity.

--- PAGE 7 ---
displaced to a new location dictated by a random-walk algo-
rithm that operates according to two possible strategies.
Depending on the proximity of the proton to the surface of
material discontinuity (pore wall or fluid phase interface),
either a conventional random-walk strategy or a First-
Passage-Time technique (Zheng and Chiew, 1989) is imple-
mented to displace the proton to its new location.
The First-Passage-Time strategy is based on the analyti-
cal solution of the unbounded diffusivity equation. This
yields a stochastic relationship between the mean square
displacement,R2,d u r i n ge a c hs t e p ,a n di t sd u r a t i o n ,/c68t,
with a maximum of probability close to the free space bulk
diffusivity, i.e.,
D R
to/c61/c60/c622
6/c68. (1)
In the above relationship,Ris limited to the largest displace-
ment allowed by the surrounding fluid boundaries, while/c68t
is constrained by the time sampling periodTEcorrespond-
ing to the echo time of the NMR tool. Since no magnetic
field gradient is enforced in the simulations, the signal gen-
erated by fluid protons is simply proportional to the popula-
tion of magnetized protons sampled with periodTE. The
First-Passage-Time method is particularly suited for the
simulation of proton displacements in large pore spaces as it
allows the simulation of large displacements in a few steps.
However, close to surfaces of material discontinuity, the
First-Passage-Time strategy does not converge and instead a
conventional random walk of fixed step/c101is necessary.
If contact is made with a surface of material discontinu-
ity, then the proton magnetization decays with a probability
equal to
pDo
/c61/c114/c101, (2)
where/c114is the surface relaxivity of the interface (Bergman et
al., 1995). If no magnetization decay occurs, then the proton
rebounds randomly at the surface of the interface.
Once a large-enough number of proton trajectories are
simulated with the Monte Carlo algorithm, convergence to
the average time solution is insured and the total magnetiza-
tion signal can be inverted into aT2distribution (generally a
few hundreds to a thousand proton trajectories are needed
for statistical convergence, depending on the modeled
pore-size distribution).
The total relaxation of the pore fluid is generally consid-
ered equal to
TTT S V TSB B22 2
1
2
111 1/c61/c43 /c61 /c43/c45/c45(/ / ) ( / / ) , /c114 (3)
whereT2Sis the surface relaxation,T2Bis the bulk relaxation,
/c114is the pore surface relaxivity, andS /Vis the pore surface-
to-volume ratio. Considering equation (3), we remark that
the dual random-walk algorithm introduced by
Ramakrishnan et al. (1999) only models the effect ofT2S.
BecauseT2Bis solely a function of fluid properties, we pro-
pose to take into account bulk relaxation effects by multiply-
ing the simulated magnetization decay by theTE-sampled
temporal decayexp(–t/T2B) before performing theT2inver-
sion. An in-depth description of this algorithm including
benchmark examples and extensions to consider the effect
of a constant external magnetic field gradient can be found
in Toumelin (2002), and Toumelin et al. (2002).
ADAPTATION OF THE SIMULATION MODEL TO
REPLICATE THE NMR RESPONSE OF FLUIDS IN
ROCK SAMPLES
The purpose of the simulation work is to ascertain the
influence of pore coupling on the NMR response of the
available core samples. Once the proportion of actively
coupled pores has been quantified for each sample, the main
task is to determine the bimodal pore model that honors the
NMR measurements.
On the hydraulic isolation of vuggy porosity
For every sample, the irreducible water saturationsSwir
measured by NMR is larger than the fractional micro-
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 97
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples
FIG.9 Three-dimensional representation of the distribution of
fluids and rock matrix at the spatial resolution of both macro-
and micro-cells. Gas blobs are centered on the intergranular
macro-pores. Compaction is simulated by including sphere
diameters larger than the concentric cube sizes.

--- PAGE 8 ---
porosity/c102micro//c102T.T h e r e f o r e ,w ec a na s s u m et h a tt h ee n t i r e
water-wet micro-pore region is filled with connate water,
and that the complementary amount of irreducible water
(Swir/c102T–/c102micro)r e s i d e si no t h e rp o r o s i t yr e g i o n s .H o w e v e r ,
the pore analysis defines the vuggy pores (pore mode 2) as
isolated and sealed by cementation. In other words, under
this assumption, no fluid can leave the vuggy macro-pores
unless the rock is fractured.
Analysis of the NMR experimental results in Figure 8
shows that, for each sample, the long-T2peak, correspond-
ing to the water-filled vugs atSw=1 ,d i s a p p e a r sa tSwir.T h i s
implies that the water-filled vugs were effectively drained
by centrifugation. Such an observation, in turn, contradicts
the initial assumption that the long-T2peak is associated
with hydraulically isolated vugs. Thus, NMR measure -
ments on the three available cores strongly suggest that
vugs observed at SEM resolution may not be totally isolated
hydraulically from the rest of the porous network.
Determination of the model parameters
By describing “vugs” as part of a coupled pore system,
their NMR response can be explained by the superposition
of coupled modes. We assume that the total NMR response
of the porous medium is dictated by the collective response
of porosity modes that are, from a diffusive viewpoint, cou-
pled by pairs of two modes. Such an assumption is of course
amenable to our numerical simulation algorithm. For
instance, the macro-porosity regions (modes 1 and 2) are
expected to couple with the pores of mode 3 (peripheral
porosity located between the cement crystals) more than
with those of mode 4 (intrinsic micro-porosity). By con-
trast, the two macro-porosity modes are expected to exhibit
no mutual coupling.
In order to be consistent with experimental results, we
choose the average radii and porosities of the main pore
modes as input parameters. The pore information for modes
1t h r o u g h3i sa d a p t e df r o mt h ep o r e - s i z ed i s t r i b u t i o na n a l y-
sis. However, the average radius of mode 4 micro-pores has
to be determined for each sample so that it honors the spatial
range observed on the corresponding SEM images, and at
the same time remains consistent with the NMR measure-
ment. Furthermore, as shown by Ramakrishnan et al.
(1999), the influence of the rock surface relaxivity /c114
(defined as the inverse of the product of T2Sand the
surface-to-volume ratioS/ Vof the pore) is crucial to the
NMR response of pores exhibiting diffusion coupling. In
sandstones, an estimate for/c114can be obtained from the
quasi-linear relationship betweenT2SandS/ V.B yc o n t r a s t ,
the presence of diffusion coupling in carbonates prevents a
simple determination of/c114.T h ec h o i c eo fN M Rp a r a m e t e r s
in our simulation model therefore represents an iterative
process with two degrees of freedom, namely, the average
micro-porosity radiusr4,a n dt h es u r f a c er e l a x i v i t y/c114.A
practical way to solve for the required parameters is to util-
ize the NMR responses of the desaturated samples.
Sample A
The NMR measurements performed on Sample A yielded
ah i g hi r r e d u c i b l ew a t e rs a t u r a t i o no f5 2 . 4 % .T h i sv a l u ei s
larger than the fractional micro-porosity/c1024//c102T=4 2 . 4 % ,
thereby implying that, atSwir,t h ed e t e c t e dN M Rs i g n a li s
produced by water within both the micro-porosity (mode 4)
and the next bigger pores of mode 3. Therefore, the selec-
tion of the equivalent model consisted of finding a satisfac-
tory combination of (r4,/c114)c o u p l e t ,s u c ht h a tt h eb i m o d a l
porosity simulation constructed with the remaining parame-
ters (/c1024=9 . 8 % ,/c1023=3 . 8 % ,r3=6/c109m) matched the NMR
measurements shown in Figure 8 atSwir.S i m u l a t i o nm o d e l s
were tested forr4=0 . 2 ,0 . 4a n d0 . 5/c109m, and for/c114=1 ,2 ,3 ,
and 5/c109m/s, corresponding to usual values for carbonate
rocks. The irreducible water saturation was matched by
defining a gas blob radius within the intergranular porosity
region of the model representing pore mode 3, where the sur-
face relaxivity at the gas/water interface was taken equal to
zero. Given the low gas hydrogen index, it was assumed that
the pore volume associated with gas created no magnetiza-
tion signal. A best fit was obtained forr4=0 . 5/c109ma n d/c114=2
/c109m/s, and by assuming a gas blob of radius equal to 6/c109m.
The model was then tested for the remaining porosity
98 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.
FIG.1 0 Cross-coupled NMR responses of the main pore
modes present in sample A, and comparison with the uncou-
pled modes. Stems represent the individualT2Sresponse of
each mode in the absence of coupling, that is, the ‘original’ loca-
tion of theT2Speaks before diffusive pore coupling.

--- PAGE 9 ---
modes. Figure 10 shows the cross-coupled NMR responses
corresponding to modes 2, 3 and 4, where each coupled
mode pair is weighted by its total porosity. If the pore sys-
tem were completely uncoupled, its NMR response would
be obtained from the superposition of theT2Svalues of its
main pore modes. In Figure 10, the individualT2Sresponse
of each mode is described in a way that allows qualitative
assessment of the coupling effect between each mode pair.
It can be seen that mode 3 only slightly influences the
remaining pore modes by causing no appreciableT2distri-
bution shift. Consequently, the response of the whole pore
system can be explained as controlled mainly by the cou-
pling between the intra-granular micro-porosity (mode 4)
and the vuggy porosity (mode 2). A reasonable approxima-
tion of the sample NMR response can then be obtained by
considering the coupled response of modes 2 and 4 atSw=1 ,
weighted by the total porosity of the sample. TheT2distri-
bution of the corresponding simulation model compares
extremely well with the measurements (see Figure 11).
Locations for the peaks on theT2spectra match quantita-
tively. We remark that the width of the micro-porosity peak
is narrower in the numerical simulation than in the real rock
because the simulation includes a single micro-pore size
whereas the real rock includes a distribution of sizes. This
exercise validates the Swir-based parameters and the
assumption of full diffusion coupling between existing
pores.
Sample B
As i m i l a ra p p r o a c hw a su s e dt oc o n s t r u c tam o d e lt h a t
could replicate the NMR response of the apparently par-
tially coupled core sample B. However, the coupling
process in this sample is markedly more complex than in
the case of sample A. An iterative process is needed to
accurately model the corresponding NMR response. Sam-
ple B exhibits an irreducible water saturation, Swir=
27.7%, which falls remarkably close to its fractional
micro-porosity,/c1024//c102T=2 6 . 3 % .C o n s e q u e n t l y ,i tw a s
assumed that the irreducible water saturation was located
within the micro-porous region only, and that the corre-
sponding NMR signal could be modeled with a unimodal
pore system. The micro-pore sizer4of the model was cali-
brated to 0.45/c109ms ot h a tt h ei n d i v i d u a lr e s p o n s eo fm o d e4
matched the NMR measurement performed atSwirassuming
as u r f a c er e l a x a t i o no f2/c109m/s. In this sample, however,
three additional coupled pore modes contribute to the NMR
response at higher water saturations, so that the pore cou-
pling process requires some simplifications.
The first stage of the iterative simulation procedure
assumed that diffusion was controlled by direct diffusive
coupling between all pore modes except modes 3 and 4.
Figure 12 shows the simulation results obtained with these
cross-coupled modes. The simulations were performed by
taking into account the porosities associated with each pair
of pore modes, along with their individual T2Sresponse
when regarded as uncoupled. As can be seen in this figure,
the overall magnetization associated with the micro-
porosity (mode 4) consistently remains close to that
obtained in the absence of diffusive coupling. However, the
magnetizations borne by the macro-porosities (modes 1 and
2) shift to lower relaxation times, spread over the wholeT2S
range of the macro-porosities, and slightly fill the gap with
mode 4. The coupling process occurring over the entire pore
system of this sample is expected to enhance the two T2
peaks centered at 70 and 2000 ms, before accounting for
bulk relaxivity, with a valley ofT2relaxations between the
two peaks. As an illustration, Figure 13 provides a compari-
son of the experimental NMRT2distribution with theT2
distribution inverted from the sum of the coupled simula-
tion results used to construct Figure 12 (obtained by assum-
ing a brine bulk relaxation of 2300 ms). Figure 13 shows
clearly that the superposition of the coupled NMR
responses is a good approximation to the NMR measure-
ments.
Further successive simulation steps would be required to
bridge the gap between the two measuredT2peaks and to
accurately reproduce the NMR measurements. These steps
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 99
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples
FIG.1 1 Comparison of simulations and measurements of
sample A at room temperature. Solid curves:Sw= 1. Dashed
curve:Sw=Swir. Although sharper than the experimental peak at
irreducible water saturation, the simulation result honors both
theT2peak value and the porosity.

--- PAGE 10 ---
would need to consider equivalent bimodal models based
on theT2distribution yielded by the previous simulation
step. For example, because it originates from the coupling
between both Modes 2 and 3 (Figure 12a) and Modes 4 and
2( F i g u r e1 2 b ) ,as t r o n gT2decay mode appears after the
first iteration around 1000 ms that does not correspond to
the initial pore-size distribution. The next step of the
process would include the simulation of the coupling rela-
tionship between this 1000-msT2mode and the one at 50 ms
that results from the coupling of Mode 4 to other modes in
the first iteration. This simulation would create a strongT2
mode at approximately 300 ms, similar to that observed
after coupling between Modes 3 and 4. When applied to all
the decay rates obtained from the previous simulation step,
this process would yield theT2values required to bridge the
T2gap between the two peaks exhibited by the measure-
ments. Such an exercise, however, is beyond the scope of
this paper.
Sample C
The third sample studied in this section is the one exhib-
iting the most macro-porosity and peripheral cementation,
and no apparent sign of diffusive coupling. We used this
example of an uncoupled sample to contrast the simulation
results with those of the coupled samples, A and B, and to
determine the behaviors which more specifically character-
ize coupled systems.
In summary, the simulation models helped us to deter-
mine coupled pore geometry for both samples A and B.
These models validated the pore-size distributions deter-
mined by core image analyses. By keeping the same pore-
size distributions and by preventing the diffusion coupling
between the pore modes, equivalent uncoupled models
were constructed for samples A and B. Simulation through
these uncoupled models yielded equivalent uncoupled
responses that reproduced what the NMR response of sam-
100 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.
FIG. 13 Comparison of simulations and measurements of
sample B at room temperature. The closest representation of
this sample’s structure after the first iteration of the numerical
model exhibits negligible diffusive coupling.
FIG. 12Cross-coupled NMR responses of the main modes
present in sample B and comparison with the uncoupled modes.
Stems represent the individualT2Sresponse of each mode in
the absence of diffusive coupling.

--- PAGE 11 ---
ples A and Bwould have beenlike in the absence of diffu-
sion coupling. These uncoupled responses are subsequently
used to assess the impact of diffusion coupling on the esti-
mation of BVI.
ANALYSIS OF SENSITIVITY OF NMR
MEASUREMENTS TO TEMPERATURE
Equation (3) assumes that the behavior of the total trans-
verse relaxation with respect to temperature can be attrib-
uted to the following factors:
a) The bulk relaxationT2B, roughly proportional to tem-
perature and inversely proportional to fluid viscosity.
b) The surface relaxivity/c114, whose dependence on tempera-
ture is governed by the magnetic content of the rock’s
mineralogy and fluid types (Godefroy et al., 2001).
c) The effective surface-to-volume ratioS/Vsurrounding
the protons of the fluid.
Without alternative means to study the effect of tempera-
ture on surface relaxivity, we discuss the relative impor-
tance of the above factors (a) and (c), based on NMR meas-
urements performed on eight carbonate samples gathered
within the same well, and on numerical simulations.
Role ofT2B
Three of the eight samples are Samples A, B, and C
described in the previous sections, along with five other
samples that were selected at a later stage of the study,
henceforth referred to as additional samples. As previously
described, measurements on samples A, B and C were per-
formed at the temperatures of 4–10°C, 22°C, 45°C, and
60–65°C. Measurements on the additional samples were
also performed at 1°C, 22°C, and 60°C.
Figure 14 shows theT2distributions of samples A, B and
Ca tt h em i n i m u ma n dm a x i m u mm e a s u r e dt e m p e r a t u r e s .
We remark that the degree of temperature dependence var-
ies from sample to sample despite the fact that the saturation
fluid is the same (brine) for all the samples. Similar obser-
vations were made on the additional samples, but no univer-
sal temperature dependency was found. However, for the
samples exhibiting temperature dependence, relaxation
timesT2consistently increased with temperature.
At each temperatureT,a n df o re a c hs a m p l e ,t h eg e o m e t-
ric mean of the experimentalT2distribution was computed
as the measuredT2value. Then, in order to assess the influ-
ence of the aforementioned factors (b) and (c) (i.e., surface
relaxivity and effective surface-to-volume ratio), we sub-
tracted the effect of bulk relaxationT2Bfrom the measured
T2value to obtain an equivalent surface relaxation, i.e.,
TT T T TTSB22 2
111() ( / () / () )/c61/c45 /c45 (4)
For all the samples of this study, the values ofT2SandT2are
plotted with respect to temperature in Figure 15. We observe
that the role played byT2Bis rather significant for the sam-
ples that exhibit moderate temperature sensitivity (namely,
samples B and C). However, for the samples that exhibit the
largest temperature dependence (such as the additional sam-
ples), the role ofT2Bis negligible and does not explain the
systematic increase ofT2withT. In the current absence of
more detailed information on the structure of the additional
samples, no systematic conclusion can be drawn to assess
the relationship between coupling and dispersion ofT2with
temperature.
Role of effectiveS/V
Next, we address the issue of the sensitivity of the effec-
tive surface-to-volume ratio to temperature changes. In an
isolated pore model, theS/Vof an individual pore does not
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 101
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples
FIG. 14Examples ofT2distributions measured at 4 and 65°C
for samples A, B and C. Solid curves: NMR response atSw=1
and 4-10°C; dashed curves:Sw= 1 and 60-65°C; dotted curves:
Sw=Swirand 22°C.

--- PAGE 12 ---
change with temperature. In a coupled pore model, how-
ever, theS/Vof an individual pore is no longer independent
of other pores. Therefore, an effectiveS/Vconcept is neces-
sary to take into account the coupling effect. Ramakrishnan
et al. (1999) showed how the presence of diffusive coupling
could modify the effectiveS/Vfor given diffusion lengths of
the medium. We recognize that temperature can also modify
this effectiveS/Vwhen diffusive coupling is present.
Indeed, when temperature, and hence bulk diffusivity,
increases, the probability of proton exchange between the
different pore modes increases as well. In turn, the effective
surface-to-volume ratio of the pore volume departs from its
geometrical value. For instance, protons within the micro-
porous regions are prone to diffuse further within the
macro-pore region when temperature increases, and there-
fore the effectiveS/V“seen” by these protons decreases.
Similarly, when temperature increases, the protons within
the macro-pore regions are more likely to reach the micro-
porous regions and therefore their effectiveS/Vincreases.
However, both phenomena do not necessary cancel each
other, since quantitatively theS/Vdecrease in larger pores
cannot compensate theS/Vincrease in smaller pores. Con-
sequently, the effectiveS/Vbehavior of such coupled sys-
tems will be dominated by proton behavior within the
micro-porous regions.
We support this stateme n twith simulations made with
the three cross-coupled pore models of sample A, for
temperatures of 4 and 65°C, and a constant surface relax-
ivity/c114=2/c109m/s estimated during the calibration process of
the simulation model with the core data. The simulatedT2S
results, independent of bulk effects, are plotted in Figure 16
and are compared to the ones previously obtained at room
temperature (Figure 10). In Figure 16, we observe that tem-
perature does affect the coupled responses between the
respective pores modes:T2Sdecreases slightly with tem-
perature.
Unresolved technical issues
This coupling influence, however, cannot explain the
temperature behavior observed in Figure 15. Indeed, this
102 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.
FIG. 16Numerical evidence for the influence of temperature
on the effective surface-to-volume ratio of diffusively coupled
pore systems. These results of simulating bimodal models of
sample A assume a constant, uniform surface relaxivity/c114=2
/c109m/s, at temperatures of 4, 22, and 65°C. (Refer to Figure 10.)
In all the cases, the surface relaxation times T2Sslightly
decrease with temperature.
FIG. 15Diagram showing the experimental influence of tem-
perature on the NMR response in carbonate samples gathered
from the same well. Black lines: measurements of samples A, B
and C; colored lines: measurements of the five additional sam-
ples from the same well. Lines without markers represent the
total measured response, whereas those with circles corre -
spond to equivalent surface relaxation.

--- PAGE 13 ---
phenomenon should justify the observation that, whenT
decreases,T2Sincreases more conspicuously when coupling
is present than when it is absent. Y et, we observe the oppo-
site trend in Figure 15. This implies that the effect of cou-
pling on the effectiveS/Vis of secondary order, and that an
adverse phenomenon not accounted for takes place here. If
we rely on the assumptions made by equation (3), then such
at e m p e r a t u r ed e p e n d e n c ei sl i k e l yt ob ed o m i n a t e db yt h e
behavior of/c114with temperature when surface relaxivity is
heterogeneous within the formation. We realize that this
proposition needs further experimental verification. How-
ever, the experimental means necessary to undertake such a
study are at this moment unavailable in our laboratory.
INFLUENCE OF TEMPERATURE AND DIFFUSIVE
COUPLING ON BOTH T2-CUTOFF, BVI, AND
PERMEABILITY
This section presents results based (a) on the comparison
between measurements performed at different temperatures
to quantify the impact of temperature, and (b) on the com-
parison between measurements and simulations at ambient
temperature to quantify the impact of coupling. In Figure
17, we plot the cumulative porosity distributions for sam-
ples A, B and C at 100% water saturation at room tempera-
ture and the two extreme temperatures that were measured,
as well as atSwirmeasured at room temperature. The current
practice of core-NMR basedT2cutoffemploys measurements
performed at ambient conditions. Neglecting the tempera-
ture dependence of theT2distribution could introduce sub-
stantial errors. In what follows, we provide a series of com-
parisons aimed at illustrating possible biases on BVI and
permeability estimates associated with high and low tem-
perature data when assuming parameters derived from
ambient conditions. Figure 17 also shows the response
simulated at ambient temperature for equivalent uncoupled
models of Samples A and B, determined from the rock
structures inferred in the first parts of this paper.
Tables 1 to 4 interpret the curves in Figure 17 to quantify
the effect of temperature and diffusive coupling on BVI (or
Swir)a n dp e r m e a b i l i t y ,b yc o m p a r i n gt h eT i m u r - C o a t e sa n d
theT2logmeanpermeability models associated with the three
samples. (See Kenyon, 1997, for a discussion of these mod-
els.) In each table, the percentages shown in italic represent
the relative errors of the estimated properties.
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 103
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples
TABLE1BVI(=/c102Swir) errors due to diffusion coupling
applying a conventional 90-msT2cutoffat ambient tempera-
ture.
Parameter Sam ple A Sample B Sample C
CorrectSwir 52% 28% 24%
Swirdetermined 27% 22% 18%
from measurements
Percent errorin Swir 48% 21% 24%
Swirdetermined from
decoupled simulations 52% 29% –
Percent error in Swir 0% 3% –
FIG. 17Cumulative porosity plots of theT2distributions of
samples A, B and C at different temperatures. Blue curves:
cumulative porosity curves obtained from the NMR response at
Sw= 100% and 4°C; dashed magenta curves: at Sw= 100%
and 22°C; red curves: at Sw= 100% and 65°C; black dotted
curves: atSw=Swirand 22°C; green curves: simulated
responses of the corresponding diffusively uncoupled models
(samples A and B only) atSw= 100% and 22°C. Vertical lines at
90 ms represent the BVI-T2cutoffconventionally used for carbon-
ate rocks.

--- PAGE 14 ---
BVI errors
The actual value ofSwir(or BVI percentile, since BVI =/c102
Swir)o fe a c hs a m p l ei sd e f i n e db yt h em a x i m u mn o r m a l i z e d
cumulative porosity read from measurements made on the
centrifuged core sample,
S P T dTwir
T
T
/c61/c162/c242() ,
22
//c102 (6)
where P/c162is theT2distribution of the centrifuged core sam-
ple.
For each sample and each experiment made at 100%
water saturation, the value ofSwircan also be determined by
S P T dT P T dTwir
T
T
T
T
/c61/c242/c242() () ,
22 22
/ (5)
wherePis theT2distribution of the fully saturated sample,
and the denominator represents the porosity of the sample.
Alternatively, by taking the value ofSwirfound on the centri-
fuged samples, we can calculate the correctT2cutoffto be used
for each sample at ambient temperature.
Table 1 quantifies the error due to diffusion coupling
when the nominal 90-ms cutoff expected for carbonate
rocks is used to interpret the NMR data. We can observe a
substantial 48% BVI error associated with such a generic
cutoff for Sample A, and relatively high errors (larger than
20%) for Samples B and C. However, if we assess the irre-
ducible water saturation using the same cutoff for the
uncoupled models of Samples A and B, then we obtain val-
ues that are remarkably close to the actual irreducible satu-
rations. This observation validates for these two samples
the usage of the standard 90 ms cutoff in the absence of dif-
fusion coupling. It also corroborates the pore-size models
when the latter are uncoupled. The large errors calculated
from the measurements on the real rocks (allowing diffu-
sion coupling) clearly suggest the need to account for diffu-
sive coupling in the interpretation of NMR data. Introduc-
ing the notion of coupling/decoupling here dramatically
reduced the discrepancies of BVI estimates for Samples A
and B.
Similar results are shown in Table 2, where we assessed
how large a variation ofT2cutoffwas required to obtain cor-
rect values of BVI (as well as permeability using the
Timur-Coates model). This exercise focused on both the
temperature differences of the measurement, and the decou-
104 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.
TABLE2CorrectT2cutofffor BVI and Timur-Coates perme-
ability model.
Parameter Sample A Sample B Sample C
Coupling effect (at ambient temperature):
CorrectT2cutoff(ms)
from measurements
(allowing coupling) 143 139 –
CorrectT2cutoff(ms)
from decoupled
simulations 92 83 –
Temperature effect (from measurements):
CorrectT2cutoff(ms)
at low temperature
(4–10°C) 126 138 120
CorrectT2cutoff(ms)
at high temperature
(60–65°C) 145 129 151
TABLE3BVI and permeability errors due to temperature,
associated with Timur-Coates permeability model.
kC B V M B V I C S SCoates c c wir wir/c61/c61 /c45/c102/c10242 4 2 1(/ ) ( [ ] / )
Parameter Sample A Sample B Sample C
CorrectSwir 52% 28% 25%
Correct
ATT2cutoff(ms)
(ambient temp.) 143 139 137
LTSwir
(low temperature) 60% 27.5% 26.5%
HTSwir
(high temperature) 51% 28.5% 23.5%
Swirrelative error
due to temperature 15% 2% 6%
/c102 23.6% 19% 21.2%
CC(D) 1.51 8.12 53.91
Correctk(mD) 4 70 980
LTkCoates(mD)
(low temperature) 2 74 838
HTkCoates(mD)
(high temperature) 4.3 67 1154
kCoatesrelative error
due to temperature 50% 5% 18%

--- PAGE 15 ---
pling allowed by the simulations. In Table 2, the correct cut-
off values in case of decoupled pores in samples A and B
(i.e., if no diffusion coupling was present) are very close to
the 90-ms cutoff previously mentioned. However, the prox-
imity of the correct cutoff values for samples A and C sug-
gests thatT2cutoffdoes not necessarily depend on the degree
of diffusion coupling exhibited by the pore structure of the
samples.
Similarly, Table 2 shows that temperature causes a
remarkable shift of the correctT2cutoffby 10 to 30 ms. Table 3
provides estimations of errors when the cutoff is individu-
ally determined from the measurement of each sample A, B,
and C, at ambient temperature (A T: 22ºC), and when these
cutoffs are applied to the measurements performed at low
temperature (LT: 4 to 10°C, depending on the sample A, B,
or C) and high temperature (HT: 60 to 65ºC). One could
expect such cutoff values to yield accurate estimates of BVI
and BVI-based permeabilities. However, a maximal BVI
relative error of 15%, accounting for as high as 8% of the
pore volume, was obtained on the temperature range used in
the measurements of sample A. Discrepancies even larger
than the above could be expected for larger temperature
intervals. This analysis proves the rather high inaccuracy of
cutoffs derived at ambient-temperature.
Permeability errors
The Timur-Coates permeability model was first used to
assess permeability from BVI estimates at the extreme
measured temperatures. Results are shown in Table 3, along
with those of BVI described in the previous section.
Because all three samples A, B and C exhibit different pore
structures, we allowed the constantCCin the Timur-Coates
permeability model to vary from sample to sample. For
each sample,CCwas calculated from the measured values
of permeability (k)a n dp o r o s i t y(/c102), and from the values of
Swirjust estimated from ambient-temperature (A T: 22ºC)
T2cutoffs. Then, using these irreducible saturations and the
true values of/c102,T a b l e3s h o w st h er e s u l t i n gv a l u e so fkfor
low and high temperatures. The maximal error percentage
caused by the use of room-temperature parameters reached
50% for Sample A and 18% for Sample C. We observe that
the high relative error obtained for sample A actually corre-
sponds to a low absolute error of 2 mD.
Table 4 shows the results obtained with theT2logmeanper-
meability model. As in the case of Table 3, the permeability
values described in Table 4 were calculated for the constant
CSat ambient temperature, based on the measured logarith-
mic means of theT2distributions. All the samples exhibit
relative errors in permeability close to 15%. Therefore, this
permeability model shows slightly less stability with tem-
perature than the Timur-Coates model. Such behavior is
consistent with the remark just made concerning Sample A.
It is noticeable that most hydrocarbon reservoirs exhibit
higher temperatures than those reported in this study, in
which case permeability errors will be larger than those
shown in Table 3 and 4.
As u b s t a n t i a ld i f f e r e n c eo fT2logmeanbetween measure-
ments and decoupled simulations is also noted in Table 4. It is
remarkable that Sample A was the sample that exhibited the
largest BVI error due to coupling (see Table 1), hence the
largest discrepancy with a BVI-based permeability model,
whereas it is Sample B that exhibits the largestT2logmeanerror,
hence the largest discrepancy with aT2logmean-based perme-
ability model. However, because in practice different con-
stants would be required for each sample, we choose not to
show calculations of such coupling-induced permeability
errors in this paper.
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 105
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples
TABLE4T2logmeanand permeability errors usingT2logmean
modelkT2logmean=Cs/c1024(T2logmean)2.
Parameter Sample A Sample B Sample C
/c102 23.6% 19% 21.2%
CS(D/s2) 67.71 414.46 1530.61
Measured
ATT2logmean(ms)
(ambient temp.)
(allowing coupling) 138 360 563
Simulated
ATT2logmean(ms)
(ambient temp.)
(preventing coupling) 88 821 –
Measured
LTT2logmean(ms)
(low temperature) 127 332 517
Measured
HTT2logmean(ms)
(high temperature) 142 353 531
Correctk(mD) 4 70 980
LTkT2logmean(mD)
(low temperature) 3.4 60 826
HTkT2logmean(mD)
(high temperature) 4.2 67 872
kT2logmeanrelative error
due to temperature 15% 14% 16%

--- PAGE 16 ---
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
As t u d yh a sb e e np r e s e n t e do fe x p e r i m e n t a lN M Rm e a s-
urements based on three carbonate samples and comple-
mented by numerical time-domain simulations. The study
made use of SEM images to provide a priori models of pore
structures for the simulations. Our simulation model incor-
porates diffusion coupling between pores with different
length scales. NMR core measurements were conducted on
the same samples to validate the simulation models and to
assess the diffusion processes taking place within the pore
structure. The simulations were then used to predict the
NMR response of the samples in the absence of diffusive
coupling. These decoupled simulations provided a basis for
comparison with the measurements, which naturally
include coupling. It has been shown that the inclusion of
diffusion coupling could improve (a) the interpretation of
the carbonate pore structure, (b) the estimation of pore size
andT2distribution, and (c) the understanding of discrepan-
cies inT2cutoffand BVI estimates.
Analysis of measurements performed at temperatures
from 4 to 65ºC showed that the generally unaccounted tem-
perature effects on bulk relaxationT2Bcould be a primary
cause for NMR temperature dependence when diffusion
coupling is weak. We also remarked that the strength of dif-
fusion coupling is influenced by temperature. However,
both bulk and diffusive coupling could not completely
explain the temperature dependence of the NMR responses
that was measured in the samples.
Finally, a quantitative estimate has been made of the
errors associated with the estimations of BVI and perme-
ability when both diffusion coupling and temperature varia-
tions are neglected. We showed that the 90-ms cutoff con-
ventionally used for carbonate rocks remained accurate for
the three samples, under the condition that no diffusive cou-
pling was present. Hence, coupling effects must be included
in an accurate interpretation of NMR measurements. It was
also found that calibrating the permeability models with
measurements performed at ambient temperature could
lead to relative errors of at least 15% for the temperature
interval considered in this study.
NOMENCLATURE
AT a m b i e n t t e m p e r a t u r e ( 2 2 º C )
BVI immovable fluid volume in place (‘bound
volume irreducible’)
CC constant for the Timur-Coates permeability
model (D), 1D = 0.987 10–12m2
CS constant for theT2logmeanpermeability model
(D/s2)
Do bulk diffusivity (/c109m2/ms)
HT high temperature of the measurements (60 to
65ºC)
k permeability (mD), 1mD = 0.987 10–15m2
LT low temperature of the measurements on
samples A, B and C (4 to 10ºC)
p probability of proton demagnetization at a fluid
interface
P, P/c162T2distributions corresponding to fully saturated
and irreducible saturation states, respectively
R macroscopic displacement of a step of First-
Passage-Time technique (nm)
S/ V surface-to-volume ratio of pore (1//c109m)
Sw water saturation in a core sample
Swir irreducible water saturation
T temperature (°C)
t time (ms)
T2 total NMR transversal relaxation time (ms)
T2B bulk NMR transversal relaxation time (ms)
T2cutoff relaxation value at which the cumulative NMR
porosity equalsBVI(ms)
T2logmeanlogarithmic mean of theT2distribution (ms)
T2S surface NMR transversal relaxation time (ms)
TE echo time of the NMR tool (ms)
/c68t time duration associated with a First-Passage-
Time technique step (ms)
/c101unitary displacement of a step of conventional
random-walk technique applied near the pore
wall (nm)
/c114surface relaxivity (/c109m/s)
/c102 porosity
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We express our gratitude to Baker Atlas for permission to
publish these results, and for partial funding through sum-
mer internship positions offered to ET and DMF in 2001. A
note of gratitude goes to Drs. Gigi Zhang and Carl Edwards
for useful technical discussions. The help of Julian Singer
and the anonymous reviewers of Petrophysicswas also
greatly appreciated to finalize this paper. We acknowledge
partial support from the Center of Excellence in Formation
Evaluation of The University of Texas at Austin, and from
the American Chemical Society under grant ACS
PRF#37519-AC9. The Center of Excellence in Formation
Evaluation is an industry research consortium jointly spon-
sored by Baker Atlas, Halliburton, Schlumberger, and Ana-
darko Petroleum Corporation.
REFERENCES
Allen, D. F., Boyd, A., Massey, J., Fordham, E. J., Amabeoku, M.
O., Kenyon, and W. E., Ward, W. B., 2001, The practical appli-
106 PETROPHYSICS March-April 2003
Toumelin et al.

--- PAGE 17 ---
cation of NMR logging in carbonates: 3 case studies, paper K,
in42nd Annual Logging Symposium Transactions: Society of
Professional Well-Log Analysts.
Anselmetti, F. S., Luthi, S., and Eberli, G . P ., 1998, Quantitative
characterization of carbonate pore systems by digital image
analysis : AAPG Bulletin, vol. 82, no. 10, p. 1815–1836.
Bergman, D. J., Dunn, K.-J., Schwartz, L. M., and Mitra, P . P .,
1995, Self-diffusion in a periodic porous medium: a compari-
son of different approaches:Physical Review E, vol. 51, no. 4,
p. 3393–3400.
Chen, S., Fang, S., Georgi, D., Salyer, J., and Shorey, D., 1999,
Optimization of NMR logging acquisition and processing,
SPE-56766,inSPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibi-
tion Proceedings: Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Godefroy, S., Fleury, M., Deflandre, F., and Korb, J.-P ., 2001,
Temperature effect on NMR surface relaxation, SPE-71700,in
Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition Proceedings:
Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Kenyon, W. E., 1997, Petrophysical principles and applications of
NMR logging:The Log Analyst, vol. 38, no. 2, p. 21–43.
Prior, D. J., Boyle, A. P ., Brenker, F., Cheadle, M. C., Day, A.,
Lopez, G ., Peruzzo, L., Potts, G . J., Reddy, S., Spiess, R.,
Timms, N. E., Trimby, P ., Wheeler, J., and Zetterström, L.,
1999, The application of electron backscatter diffraction and
orientation contrast imaging in the SEM to textural problems in
rocks:American Mineralogist, vol. 84, p. 1741–1759.
Quintero, L., Boyd, A. Gyllensten, A., and El Wazeer, F., 1999,
Comparison of permeability from NMR and production analy-
sis in carbonate reservoirs, SPE-56798,inAnnual Technical
Conference and Exhibition Proceedings: Society of Petroleum
Engineers.
Ramakrisnan, T. S., Schwartz, L. M., Fordham, E. J., Kenyon, W.
E., and Wilkinson, D. J., 1999, Forward models for nuclear
magnetic resonance in carbonate rocks:The Log Analyst, vol.
40, no. 4, p. 260–270.
Toumelin, E., 2002, Monte Carlo simulations of NMR measure-
ments in carbonate rocks under a constant magnetic field gradi-
ent: Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Toumelin, E., Torres-V erdín, C., and Chen, S., 2002, Quantifica-
tion of multi-phase fluid saturations in complex pore geome-
tries from simulations of NMR measurements, SPE-77399,in
Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition Proceedings:
Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Zheng, L. H. and Chiew, Y . C., 1989, Computer simulation of
diffusion-controlled reactions in dispersions of spherical sinks:
Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 90, no. 1, p. 32–327.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Emmanuel Toumelinholds an engineering degree from the
Ecole Centrale de Lille, France, and an MS in Petroleum Engineer-
ing from the University of Texas at Austin. He is now pursuing a
PhD degree and is working on micro-scale petrophysics, NMR dif-
fusion, and rock dielectric properties.
Email: toumelin@mail.utexas.edu
Carlos Torres-Verdínreceived a PhD in Engineering Geosci-
ence from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1991. During
1991-1997, he held the position of Research Scientist with
Schlumberger-Doll Research. From 1997-1999, he was Reservoir
Specialist and Technology Champion with YPF (Buenos Aires,
Argentina). Since 1999, he is an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering of The
University of Texas at Austin, where he conducts research in for-
mation evaluation and integrated reservoir characterization. He
has served as Guest Editor for Radio Science, and is currently a
member of the Editorial Board of the Journal of Electromagnetic
Waves and Applications, and an associate editor for Petrophysics
(SPWLA) and the SPE Journal.
Songhua Chenis a staff scientist and project leader for NMR
interpretation development at Baker Atlas Houston Technology
Center. Prior to joining Baker Atlas, he was a Research Scientist
for 5 years with Texas Engineering Experiment Station in College
Station, Texas, where he worked in the area of NMR and MRI
applications to flow in porous media. Songhua has a BS from Nan-
jing Institute of Technology in China and a PhD from University of
Utah, both in Physics.
D. Marion Fischeris a scientist with Baker Hughes Inteq at
Celle, Germany, since December 2001. Prior to joining Inteq, she
spent one and half year at Leibniz Institute of Applied Geosciences
in Germany as a postdoc doing NMR laboratory research, and a
summer at Houston Technology Center of Baker Atlas, USA. Mar-
ion received her Diploma (physics) in 1995 and PhD (NMR phys-
ics) in 1999, both from the University of Hannover, Germany. Her
PhD dissertation topic deals with NMR diffusion measurements in
solid-state materials.
March-April 2003 PETROPHYSICS 107
Reconciling NMR Measurements and Numerical Simulations:
Assessment of Temperature and Diffusive Coupling Effects on Two-Phase Carbonate Samples