--- PAGE 1 ---
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228481329
Modeling of Multiple Echo-Time NMR Measurements for Complex Pore
Geometries and Multiphase Saturations
Article  in  SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering · August 2003
DOI: 10.2118/85635-PA
CITATIONS
34
READS
254
6 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Baker Hughes View project
Petrophysics View project
Songhua Chen
Halliburton
100 PUBLICATIONS   723 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Songhua Chen on 03 September 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Modeling of Multiple Echo-Time NMR
Measurements for Complex Pore
Geometries and Multiphase Saturations
E. Toumelin, SPE, and C. Torres-Verdín, SPE, The U. of Texas at Austin, and S. Chen, SPE, Baker Atlas
Summary
We develop a numerical algorithm to simulate nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) measurements in the presence of constant mag-
netic field gradients. The algorithm is based on Monte Carlo con-
ditional random walks in restricted and unrestricted space. Simu-
lations can be performed of 3D porous media that include both
arbitrary bimodal pore distributions and multiphase fluid satura-
tions. The ability to account for the presence of a constant external
magnetic field gradient allows us to replicate actual well-logging
conditions that include the effect of Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill
(CPMG) pulse sequences at a microscopic level. This is accom-
plished by simulating ideal pulse-acquisition techniques that in-
clude multiple interecho times (TE) similar to those currently used
by the well-logging industry. Benchmark examples are presented
to validate the accuracy and internal consistency of our algorithm
against previously published results for the case of a null magnetic
field gradient. Validation examples also are presented against ac-
tual NMR measurements performed on core samples of carbonate
rock formations.
Interpretation work is focused on the petrophysical assessment
of both partial oil/water saturations and pore structures exhibiting
diffusive coupling. Simulation examples are designed to quantify
whether the inclusion of diffusion under a magnetic field gradient
can improve the interpretation of multiphase fluid saturations
when diffusion coupling is significant. The simulation algorithm
sheds light on new NMR data-acquisition strategies that could be
used to improve the detection and quantification of fluid types,
complex fluid saturations, and complex pore geometries.
Introduction
The presence of diffusion pore coupling in carbonate rocks
(mainly grainstones) challenges conventional NMR interpretation
techniques. Although pore-coupling phenomena are commonplace
in the majority of rock pore systems, they become relevant to
assess NMR measurements when the following three conditions
are met: (a) microporosity regions are present within the grains; (b)
micropores are well-connected (not cemented) to outer
macroporous regions exhibiting low surface-to-volume ratios,
thereby allowing fluid diffusion between both pore scales; and (c)
rock surface relaxivity is low enough to prevent the decay of
proton magnetization within the macroporosity before protons can
enter the microporous regions. In addition, fluid diffusivity must
be sufficiently large for diffusion coupling to be significant within
the time scale of NMR measurements. This is usually the case only
for water and light hydrocarbons. As a result, fluid magnetization
will be exchanged between micro- and macropore regions, and no
obvious relationship will exist between NMR transverse relaxation
(T
2) distribution and pore-size distribution. Fig. 1 illustrates con-
ditions (a) and (b), described previously, with an example of scan-
ning electron microscope (SEM) images of a carbonate rock ex-
hibiting diffusion coupling.
Varying TE is a common NMR data-acquisition technique used
for in-situ reservoir fluid identification.
1–3 However, in the case
of NMR measurements performed in carbonate rocks, there are no
published reports dealing with the impact of diffusion coupling
on hydrocarbon typing and quantification using multiple- TE log-
ging techniques. The objectives of this paper are twofold: (a) to
develop a simulation algorithm capable of reproducing NMR mea-
surements in complex pore geometries under a variety of experi-
mental conditions and (in particular) under the influence of a con-
stant magnetic field gradient, and (b) to provide simulation ex-
amples that will help assess the validity of fluid phase
discrimination using multi-TE measurements in porous media ex-
hibiting diffusion coupling.
In the past, numerical models of NMR decay were proposed
based on periodic bimodal packs of spheres that accounted for
surface relaxation effects. We have reproduced and extended Ra-
makrishnan et al.
4’s Monte Carlo algorithm to account for the
effect of an external constant magnetic field gradient of the type
enforced by modern NMR tools, and in the presence of a nonwet-
ting phase. The first part of this paper introduces the Monte Carlo
simulation algorithm applicable to a bimodal pack of spheres in the
presence of a constant magnetic field gradient. A subsequent sec-
tion describes examples of numerical simulation that illustrate the
versatility of the algorithm. Finally, we derive and interpret simu-
lation examples intended to address specific issues of fluid dis-
crimination using multiple interecho times in the presence of dif-
fusion coupling. We address four specific cases of NMR T
2 dis-
tributions (two unimodal and two bimodal) by modeling several
possible combinations of pore structure, diffusion coupling, and
fluid distribution. These case studies were designed so that differ-
ent pore configurations created identical NMR signals at low val-
ues of TE but exhibited differences at high values of TE.
Model for the Simulation of NMR Decay
The algorithm developed to numerically simulate NMR magneti-
zation decay in carbonate rocks makes use of conditional Monte
Carlo random walks. It is based on the algorithm described by
Ramakrishnan et al.,
4 further generalized to include microscopic
diffusion effects in the presence of a constant magnetic field gra-
dient.
5 The assumption of a constant gradient across the zone
probed by NMR tools is generally an accurate approximation in
the presence of small contrasts of magnetic susceptibility (i.e., in
the absence of paramagnetic materials). Porous media can include
micro- and macroporous regions (grainstone model) to form a
bimodal pore distribution, or they can exhibit a single pore size
with solid grains (wackestone model).
Model Geometry. The simulation model was constructed with a
3D bimodal pack of spheres that replicates the complex pore-
structure geometry encountered in some carbonate formations,
namely microporous grainstones, where the solid micrograins are
arranged into packs. As in the example shown in Fig. 1, the model
adopted for the simulations accounts for a microporosity region
immediately surrounding the grains, while different types of
macroporosity (characterized by different sizes and degrees of ce-
mentation, depending on diagenesis) exist between the packs. The
geometrical construction of the 3D model of a bimodal pack of
spheres is based on the following assumptions:
 Bimodal pore-size distribution.
 Periodic geometry.
 Isotropic pores.
Copyright © 2003 Society of Petroleum Engineers
This paper (SPE 85635) was revised for publication from paper SPE 77399, first presented
at the 2002 SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, San Antonio, T exas, 29
September–2 October. Original manuscript received for review 14 January 2003. Revised
manuscript received 29 May 2003. Paper peer approved 9 June 2003.
234 August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 3 ---
 Spherical, compacted micrograins.
 Spherical, compacted grain packs.
At the micro- (or macro-) scale, each grain (or grain pack) of the
model is defined as a sphere inscribed into a concentric cubic cell.
If the sphere does not completely fill its cubic unit, then the
complementary volume is considered filled with fluids. Further-
more, fixed blobs centered in the macropore space can be included
in the model to represent partial saturations of the immiscible
nonwetting oil phase, while the microporosity can only be filled
with irreducible water. Fig. 2 shows a 3D period of the assumed
bimodal pore structure. Despite its simplicity, this model is able to
reproduce important percolation properties that implicitly take into
account restricted diffusion in both wetting and nonwetting fluids.
Such properties include the following:
 The constrained relationship between pore-throat size and
pore-body size creates a permeability percolation threshold; for
porosities below 3%, all throats are closed to fluid passage.
 The oil phase becomes spatially continuous only after the oil
blobs reach the boundaries of the larger cubic cells.
Diffusion behavior is best described as a very near-field phenom-
enon. Therefore, a model of periodic sphere packs within cubic
grain packs is expected to reproduce diffusion phenomena within
cubic grain packs similar to those taking place within disordered
packs, as long as the distribution of pore size and throat size
remain comparable in both cases.
Obviously, the periodic model adopted in this paper can only
model one single macropore size and one single micropore size.
This will result in NMR surface relaxation T
2 peaks sharper than
those associated with a disordered sphere pack.
Unimodal pore-size distributions can be constructed with the
same basic model by allowing no microporosity. The NMR re-
sponse of uncoupled bimodal pore structures (i.e., porous media
where no diffusion coupling occurs) can be simulated by super-
imposing the response of each isolated pore mode.
Dual Random-Walk Strategy. At each iteration of the NMR nu-
merical simulation algorithm, a fictitious proton is randomly cho-
sen within the volume occupied by a fluid in the pore space. This
proton is thereafter displaced to a new location determined by a
continuous random walk operating according to two possible strat-
egies. Depending on the proximity of the proton to the surface of
material discontinuity (pore-wall or fluid-phase interface), either a
conventional random-walk strategy or Zheng and Chiew ’s First-
Passage-Time technique
6 can be implemented to displace the pro-
ton to its next location.
The First-Passage-Time strategy was developed to allow mac-
roscopic jumps in the bulk pore space and hence to speed up the
otherwise computationally prohibitive random-walk process. It is
based on the analytical solution of the unbounded diffusivity equa-
tion, which yields a stochastic relationship between the mean
square displacement, < R
2 >, during a given step, and its duration,
/H9004t, with a maximum of probability close to the free space bulk
diffusivity; that is,
Do = /H20855R2/H20856
6/H9004t. ............................................ (1)
Fig. 3 illustrates the selection of the random-walk strategy accord-
ing to the distance between the particles and the surrounding fluid
boundaries. Grain surface and fluid interfaces constitute the wet-
ting-phase boundaries, whereas only the interface between fluids
constitutes a nonwetting phase boundary.
Model of Diffusive Relaxation. In general, the apparent transver-
sal relaxation time T
2 of the decay of magnetization signal can be
written as
1
T2
=
1
T2S
+
1
T2B
+
1
T2D
,................................... (2)
where T2S is the surface relaxation, T2B is the bulk relaxation, and
T2D is the decay rate caused by diffusion in the presence of a
Fig. 1—SEM images of a carbonate sample at 140X (top panel)
and 1400X (bottom panel) magnifications. A dual-porosity
structure is clearly evidenced at these two scales: from a di-
agenetic viewpoint, the grains seen on the top panel were mi-
critized into micrograins, as shown on the bottom panel. There-
fore, the solid matrix is formed by micrograins agglomerated
into packs or pseudo (microporous) macrograins.
Fig. 2—Three-dimensional representation of the distribution of
the fluids and rock matrix at the spatial resolution of both
macro- and microcells. Gas blobs are centered in the
macropores. Grain compaction is simulated by assigning
sphere diameters larger than the concentric cube sizes.
235August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 4 ---
gradient field (diffusive relaxation). The Monte Carlo algorithm
described by Ramakrishnan et al.4 takes into account the effect of
surface relaxation, but it does not include the effect of bulk or
diffusive relaxations. On the one hand, T
2B is governed by fluid
properties, regardless of time or geometry, and therefore can be
applied independently from the Monte Carlo simulation process.
On the other hand, T
2D depends on both NMR experimental pa-
rameters (i.e., TE and gradient strength G) and the effective fluid
diffusivity, D, as suggested by the macroscopic expression 7
T2D = /H20873
/H92532G2TE2D
12 /H20874
−1
, ................................. (3)
where /H9253is the proton gyromagnetic ratio. When molecules diffuse
through restricted geometries, the otherwise free diffusion is hin-
dered; this causes the observed apparent diffusivity to become
time- and geometry-dependent.
8 The effective diffusivity D decays
from the bulk (free-space) value Do at a rate that depends on
tortuosity, time, and pore surface-to-volume ratio. Within mi-
croporous regions in the micrometer range, for instance, the decay
of D is instantaneous to reach an asymptotic value equal to the
inverse of the tortuosity of the medium. By considering the diver-
sity of pore sizes within carbonate rocks, it then becomes neces-
sary to track the diffusivity effect through the random walk to
model diffusive relaxation.
Because the magnetization signal acquired by the NMR tool is
proportional to the cosine of the spin phases of the fluid protons,
we designed the algorithm so that it could track the spin dephasing
caused by the constant magnetic field gradient. At time t, a proton
spin phase is given by the integral
/H9278/H20849t/H20850= /H20848
0
t
/H9253G /H11080r/H20849t/H11032/H20850dt/H11032= /H9253G/H20848
0
t
z/H20849t/H11032/H20850dt/H11032, .................. (4)
where r is the position of the proton, and the gradient vector G is
assumed to point in the z-direction. Because of the stochastic na-
ture of the displacement z determined with the First-Passage-Time
technique, the evaluation of the integral of Eq. 4 is not trivial. To
circumvent this problem, we made use of the spin phase-shift
expression derived by Gudgjartsson and Patz,
9 which is based on
a stochastic formulation of the phase shift created by the gradient.
This phase-tracking strategy was designed to honor the CPMG
sequence with a sampling rate TE, as described next.
Simulation Algorithm. The following algorithmic sequence was
applied for each proton and at each random-walk step,i, to account
for the selection of a displacement strategy and of a CPMG sam-
pling protocol:
1. Determine the distance d to the closest material interface.
2. If d is large, then the proton movement is inscribed in free
space, and the First-Passage-Time technique is applied.
4,6 Because
of the constraint of the TE sequence, the duration /H9004t is such that it
cannot extend beyond one half- TE period.
3. If d is small, then the previous algorithm does not converge.
Therefore, it must be substituted by a conventional random-walk
strategy with fixed infinitesimal displacement /H9255.
4. Regardless of d, the phase shift acquired during this step is
given by
9
/H9278/H20849ti+1/H20850= /H9278/H20849ti/H20850+ /H9253G/H20877
/H20851z/H20849ti/H20850− z/H208490/H20850/H20852+ /H20851z/H20849ti+1/H20850− z/H208490/H20850/H20852
2 /H20878/H20849ti+1 − ti/H20850
+ /H9253G/H20881
Do/H20849ti+1 − ti/H208503
2 Normal /H20849/H20850,.................( 5 )
where ti, ti+1, and 0 are the initial instant of the step, the final
instant of the step, and the time origin, respectively. In Eq. 5,
Normal()i sa Gaussian probability density function of zero mean
and unity variance.
5. When t
i+1/H11505nTE, where n is an integer, the phase cosine (i.e.,
the magnetization of the particle at time nTE) is recorded and
added to the sum of signals of all the protons simulated at timenTE.
6. When ti+1/H11505(n+1⁄2)TE, where n is an integer, the phase is
reversed to honor the radio-frequency 180° repolarizing CPMG
magnetic pulses. This procedure makes the assumption of perfect
and instantaneous pulses.
7. If contact is made with a surface of material discontinuity
(either grain or interface between immiscible fluids), the proton
magnetization decays with a probability equal to
10
p =
2/H9267/H9255
3Do
, ............................................. (6)
where /H9267is the surface relaxivity of the interface. Depending on the
wetting fluid and the rock, /H9267typically ranges from 1 to 20 /H9262m/s for
a rock/fluid interface. Fluid/fluid interfaces generally exhibit neg-
ligible surface relaxivity. If no magnetization decay occurs, the
proton rebounds specularly at the surface of the interface.
Once a sufficient number of proton trajectories are simulated
with the Monte Carlo algorithm, convergence to the average time
solution is ensured, and a total magnetization signal is output.
Generally, a few hundred to a thousand proton trajectories are
needed for convergence within porous media, depending on the
modeled pore-size distribution. The magnetization signal is sub-
sequently inverted into a T
2 distribution by means of a curvature-
smoothing regularization11 generally used to invert noisy experi-
Fig. 3— Fraction of a cross section taken through a pack period.
The graph illustrates the criteria used to select a specific ran-
dom-walk technique according to the location of the particles at
the onset of the walk step. A nominal distance of 3
/H9255is taken as
the safety thickness within which the First-Passage-Time tech-
nique reverses to a conventional random walk. A wetting layer
of thickness L
W is also included to constrain the rock wettability
at the surface of the microporous grain.
236 August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 5 ---
mental NMR magnetization decays. Fig. 4 is a flow chart that
graphically describes the details of the Monte Carlo algorithm.
Testing and Generalization of the Algorithm
Effect of Surface Relaxivity on Diffusion Pore Coupling in the
Absence of a Magnetic Field Gradient. To establish a reference
for nongradient experiments, we first conducted NMR simulations
to illustrate the effect of surface relaxivity
/H9267on diffusion coupling.
An interecho time, TE/H115051 ms, was adopted in the presence of a
null magnetic field gradient. Fig. 5 shows good agreement be-
tween our simulation results and those published by Ramakrishnan
et al .
4 for similar geometrical and fluid properties. A limitation
exists to the accuracy of our simulations for small TE sampling in
the case of large values of /H9267, however. The principle of diffusion
pore coupling is brought to light by considering the spatial mo-
lecular dispersion phenomenon illustrated in Fig. 6. Diffusion pore
coupling increases when
/H9267decreases: the smaller the value of /H9267,
the higher the proton exchange, and therefore the higher the mag-
netization exchange between pores.
Effect of Dual Fluid Saturation on the NMR Response of
Coupled Pore Modes. When immiscible oil blobs are included in
the model, the amount of wetting water available for coupled
magnetization is naturally reduced. Therefore, the less the water
saturation (S
w), the less the transfer of magnetization between the
two pore scales, thereby rendering diffusion coupling negligible.
This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 7. Again, our simulation
Fig. 4— Flow chart of the NMR simulation algorithm used for each fluid phase. In thedescriptions, n is the echo index of the CPMG
sampling, i is the particle index, j is the step index along particle i’s walk, Pj is the 3D position of particle i at the onset of step j,
tj is the walk time of particle i at the onset of step j, and /H9278j is the spin phase of particle i at the onset of step j.
237August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 6 ---
results are in good agreement with those published by Ramakrish-
nan et al.4
Comparison With Analytical Relaxation in Free Diffusion. To
test the consistency and accuracy of the spin-dephasing and phase-
reversing strategies included in the NMR simulation algorithm,
unbounded diffusion was simulated with grain diameters tending
to zero for both 1-cp and 6-cp oils, at a temperature of 370 K,
under a constant magnetic field gradient of strength 20 G/cm.
Results from this simulation exercise are shown in Fig. 8. An
Fig. 6— Illustration of the spatial dispersion of fluid particles as
a function of surface relaxivity, /H9267. Initially, within a period of the
dual pack of spheres, dark dots indicate locations of particles
borne by the micropore space, whereas light dots indicate lo-
cations of particles borne by the macropore space. Final par-
ticle positions are either the locations of the particles at their
decay or current locations of nondecayed particles after a
1-second lapse.
Fig. 7 — Effect of nonwetting oil saturations on the NMR re-
sponse of diffusively coupled systems. Simulation results of
(a) our algorithm and (b) Ramakrishnan et al. ’s
4 results, ob-
tained for similar coupled geometries. Gray-shaded peaks
stand for the magnetization within the oil phase only, whereas
gray lines limit the T
2 peaks of the magnetization signal caused
by wetting water only.
Fig. 5— Comparison of simulations of NMR data transformed into equivalent pore-size distributions: (a) simulations performed with
our simulation program and (b) simulations reported by Ramakrishnan et al.,4 using a single water phase and different values of
surface relaxivity /H9267. Equivalent pore-size distributions were obtained by multiplying /H9267and simulated T2 distributions, and they
exhibit the importance of /H9267in NMR diffusion coupling. Although our algorithm is unable to detect low T2 values in the theoretical
case of high /H9267values, the agreement between the two sets of simulations is remarkable.
238 August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 7 ---
excellent agreement is found between the macroscopic analytical
expression given in Eq. 4 and the microscopic numerical results
provided by our Monte Carlo simulation algorithm. Once bulk
relaxation is applied to the results of the simulations, the match
with analytical values [i.e., 1/(1/ T
2B+1/T2D)] is even closer.
Example of Simulations of NMR Measurements Acquired in a
Coupled Carbonate Rock. Under the assumption of diffusion
coupling between existing pore modes, we reached very good
agreements between experimental and simulation results. For in-
stance, we were able to consistently calibrate the sphere-pack
simulation model to geometrical pore core data.
12 Fig. 9 provides
an example of such simulation results. The numerical simulations
compare very well to experimental NMR measurements, including
the case in which a magnetic field gradient is present. Based on
the temperature dependence of the parameters D
o and T2B used
in the simulation algorithm, the model was used without an applied
magnetic field gradient in conjunction with experimental data to
assess the relative effects of diffusion coupling and temperature
on NMR measurements and on the corresponding NMR-
interpreted permeabilities.
12
Application of the Simulation Algorithm to Fluid
Discrimination With Multiple TE Measurements
NMR T
2 distributions acquired in carbonate formations often ex-
hibit either a unimodal or a bimodal behavior. Other than the trivial
case in which the saturating fluid is irreducible water, the inter-
pretation of unimodal and bimodal distributions is not straightfor-
ward in the presence of non-negligible pore-coupling effects. Fur-
ther, when both wetting (water) and nonwetting (oil) phases are
present, the overall T
2 distribution is collectively influenced by all
these mechanisms. Previous work on using multiple- TE logging
measurements to identify oil saturation and viscosities 1–3 was
based entirely on the assumption of uncoupled systems. Several
NMR simulation examples were designed in oil/water systems to
illustrate the capabilities and limitations of multiple-TE acquisition
methods in the presence of complex pore structures and multiphase
fluid distributions.
We consider four case studies for this simulation/interpretation
component of the paper. The four cases are classified according to
the T
2 distribution pattern simulated for standard interecho times
of 0.25 ms, and they assume a magnetic field gradient strength of
15 G/cm. For each case, the standard NMR response is ambiguous
and can be interpreted in very different ways using several hy-
potheses of distributions of pore sizes, structures, and saturating
fluids. Simulation results are obtained for interecho times of 1 and
4 ms. According to the hypotheses formulated below, the models
used in the simulations account for either a single pore size (for
unimodal and uncoupled bimodal structures) or two coupled pore
sizes (for coupled bimodal structures). The nominal pore sizes, as
defined on the corresponding pore-size distributions of Figs. 10
through 13, were obtained by adjusting the geometrical dimen-
sions of the unit cells of the periodic models. In all cases, the ratio
between grain diameter and concentric cube side was kept constant
and equal to 1.23, the surface relaxivity at the interface between
fluids was neglected, and the grain surface relaxivity was held
equal to 3
/H9262m/s, which corresponds to the usual surface relaxivi-
ties encountered in carbonates. Both light (1.5 cp) and medium (6
cp) oil grades in typical laboratory conditions were considered as
nonwetting fluids, with bulk properties that are summarized in
Table 1. In Figs. 10 through 13, T
2 distributions resulting from the
simulation of the combined effect of bulk, surface, and diffusion
relaxations are shown for each case. Gray-shaded T
2 distributions
correspond to the contribution of oil only, while nonshaded dis-
tributions correspond to the total magnetization signal created by
both oil and water. Because this combined signal is averaged on
both fluids, the T
2 contribution of oil is smeared when it is in-
cluded in the overall T2 distribution within both fluids. This is why
T2 peaks corresponding only to oil look sharper and sometimes
exhibit higher amplitudes than T2 distributions of the total signal.
Case 1: Single T2 Peak at High T2 Values (1,000 ms)
(Fig. 10). Hypothesis 1 (C1H1). Unimodal pore-size distribution
filled only with water. The T2 peak shifts to the left because of the
increased role played by T2D on the NMR time relaxation for
TE/H115054 ms.
Hypothesis 2 (C1H2). Same as C1H1, but including blobs of
light oil in the pores. At lowTE values, the light-oil bulk relaxation
equals the surface relaxation of the water filling the rest of the pore
space. In comparison with C1H1, this oil grade decays slower than
water with increasing values of TE. However, the difference in
total signal is not noticeable.
Fig. 8 — Comparison of analytical T2D relaxations (dash) and
simulated T2 distributions (solid) of 1-cp and 6-cp oil grades in
unbounded diffusion. The simulation results are considered to
account for no bulk relaxation [before multiplying the output
decay by the function exp( –t/T
2B)]. T2D values are calculated
from Eq. 3 for TE=0.25, 1, and 4 ms [i.e., 160, 2,600, and 41,500
ms for light oil (1 cp), and 1,000, 15,000, and 248,000 ms for
medium oil (6 cp), respectively].
Fig. 9— Example of the comparison of measured and simulated
T2 distributions in the absence of a magnetic field gradient 12
(G=0), and then with (G=15 G/cm), for echo times of 1 and 2 ms.
Gray-shaded (or unshaded) distributions correspond to mea-
surements and simulations performed at irreducible water satu-
ration (or 100% brine saturation). A very good agreement exists
in terms of distribution spread for 100% brine saturation and T
2
peak value for both saturations, especially considering the limi-
tations of the exclusively bimodal distribution of the model.
239August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 8 ---
Case 2: Single T2 Peak at Average T2 Values (200 ms)
(Fig. 11). Hypothesis 1 (C2H1). Unimodal pore-size distribution
filled only with water. The nominal pore size is smaller than in C1H1.
Hypothesis 2 (C2H2). Comparable to C1H2, but with a me-
dium-grade oil and a slightly smaller pore size than in C1H2. Oil
bulk relaxation is assumed equal to water surface relaxation within
the complementary pore space. The dominant oil saturation dic-
tates the NMR behavior of the entire system. Because the bulk
relaxation of the prominent oil saturation has a magnitude similar
to its diffusive relaxation in bulk space (i.e., D∼D
o), the increment
in echo time only slightly modifies its T2 peak value. We remark
that the total black curve shown in the corresponding panel of
Fig. 12 represents the joint response caused by both fluids and
masks the NMR response of water peaking at T
2/H11505100 ms (as in
case C2H1).
Hypothesis 3 (C2H3). Bimodal, coupled pore structure with
micro- and macroporosity regions, containing water only. This
pore system behaves in a fashion similar to the unimodal C2H1
case described earlier, except for the case TE/H115054 ms, in which the
relaxation time corresponding to the T
2 peak is equal to half of that
obtained for C2H1 (55 ms vs. 100 ms). This means that diffusively
coupled pores manifest themselves as longer diffusion lengths,
whereupon their magnetization signal decays faster than the
equivalent signal because of uncoupled systems. In uncoupled sys-
tems, the macropores maintain the total T
2 response at values
higher than that of micropores, whereas in coupled systems the
contribution caused by micropores dominates the diffusive pro-
cess, thereby leading to lower decay times.
Hypothesis 4 (C2H4). Bimodal, coupled pore structure, includ-
ing medium-grade oil in the macroporous regions. The oil bulk
relaxation is close to that of the coupled response described for
C2H3. The presence of a medium oil maintains the relaxation
value of the T
2 peak of the entire system higher than its value in
C2H3 and, hence, equal to that of the unimodal pores of case
C2H1. Because oil occupies part of the macropore space, less
space is available for water, whereupon diffusion coupling be-
Fig. 10— Case 1 simulation results. Each row states a hypothesis, symbolizes it in t erms of a fluid distribution within the pore
system, and presents the results of the corresponding simulations for thr ee values of interecho time. The first column of graphs
summarizes the distribution of fluids in the pore space. Dashed (or plain) stems represent the porosity fractions of water (or oil)
in the pore space characterized by the nominal pore sizes described in the h orizontal axis of the plot. Fluid content is indicated
in porosity units. The remaining columns describe the T2 distributions resulting from the simulations with a 15 G/cm gradient, as
well as TE values of 0.25, 1, and 4 ms. Gray-shaded T2 distributions correspond to the magnetization within oil only, whereas
unshaded T2 distributions represent the magnetization within the whole pore system ( i.e., including all fluid phases). Total
magnetization can be understood as that measured with the NMR tool.
Fig. 11— Case 2 simulation results. Refer to the caption of Fig. 10 for details on the plotting conventions. Gray-shaded T2 distri-
butions correspond to the magnetization within oil only, whereas unfille d distributions represent the magnetization within the
whole pore system (i.e., also including water).
240 August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 9 ---
comes weak. On the one hand, the presence of residual water
causes lower decay times because the proportion of microporous
borne water is higher in the coupling mode. On the other hand, the
oil phase exhibits a T
2 shift much lower than that of water whenTE
increases. Collectively, these two adverse effects make the T2 re-
sponse of the system slightly more spread than that of case C2H1.
Case 3: Double T2 Peak at Low and High Values of T2 (50 and
1,000 ms) (Fig. 12). As mentioned previously, the short T2 peak
can be caused solely by irreducible fluid. Hence, this configuration
can only be representative of uncoupled pore systems or coupled
systems that remain effectively uncoupled by the complete oil
saturation of the macropores. Therefore, this case is more typical
of water/oil mixtures.
Hypothesis 1 (C3H1). Bimodal uncoupled pore-size distribu-
tion, filled with water only. The two distinct T
2 peaks originating
from the pore-size segregation converge into a single peak when
T
2D dominates the NMR response of the system.
Hypothesis 2 (C3H2). Bimodal uncoupled pore structure with
partial saturation of medium oil. Because of the contrast in the
relaxation times of the two fluids, for TE/H115050.25 ms, the T2 value
of its macroporosity peak shifts from 1,000 ms for full water
Fig. 12— Case 3 simulation results. Refer to the caption of Fig. 10 for details on the plotting conventions. Gray-shaded T2 distri-
butions correspond to the oil only, whereas unfilled distributions corre spond to the whole pore system (also including water).
Fig. 13— Case 4 simulation results. Refer to the caption of Fig. 10 for additional de tails on the plotting conventions. Gray-shaded
T2 distributions correspond to the oil only, whereas unfilled distributions correspond to the whole pore system (also including water).
241August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 10 ---
saturation (see C3H1) to 500 ms for partial oil saturation. WhenTE
increases, this shift is reinforced and splits the magnetization be-
tween two modes for TE/H115054 ms.
Hypothesis 3 (C3H3). Same configuration as in C3H2, but with
light oil. The fact that light-oil bulk relaxation is closer to 1,000 ms
than medium-oil bulk relaxation causes the NMR response at low
echo time to be the same as that for full water saturation (C3H1).
However, a large T
2 spread appears at the longest echo times
where, on the contrary, water alone causes a sharp, selective T2
decay. Despite different values ofT2B between this light oil and the
medium oil used in case C3H2, at TE/H115054 ms the effect of the
applied magnetic field cancels any possibility of discrimination
based on total relaxation time. Efficient discrimination of both oil
types is not likely with multiple echo times in this geometrical pore
configuration. Echo times longer than 4 ms would be required to
do so, but these would entail excessively large levels of measure-
ment noise.
Hypothesis 4 (C3H4). Bimodal coupled or uncoupled pore
structure, with complete light-oil saturation of the macropores.
This case is mainly characterized by a complete segregation of the
oil and water T
2 peaks at large echo times. Given the large contrast
in size between micro- and macropores (a factor of 40), such a
situation provides obvious evidence of the complete saturation of
the macropores with light oil (see also C4H2). Case C3H4 repre-
sents a good-quality oil reservoir with no free water, in which case
diffusive coupling has a negligible impact on NMR interpretation.
Case 4: Double T
2 Peak at Average and High Values of T2 (100
and 1,000 ms) (Fig. 13). Hypothesis 1 (C4H1). Bimodal un-
coupled system, same as C3H1 but with larger micropores (which
become mesopores).
Hypothesis 2 (C4H2). Same configuration as C3H4, with light
oil and mesopores instead of micropores. The ratio of macro- to
mesopore size is smaller (i.e., 15) than the ratio of macro- to
micropore size in case C3H4 (i.e., 40). This difference is enough
to explain the fact that in case C3H4, two distinct peaks appear for
TE/H115054 ms, whereas in case C4H2, water magnetization exhibits
decay times close to those of oil magnetization. As a consequence,
the total system response exhibits a single, largely spread T
2 peak.
It can be concluded that the reservoir quality interpreted in case
C3H4 (two distinct T
2 peaks at long TE) is valid only in the
presence of microporosity.
Hypothesis 3 (C4H3). Unimodal pore structure partially filled
with light oil. The main objective of this simulation case is to
explore a possible difference with case C4H2 where, despite the
same effective pore size left for water saturation (same peak re-
laxation at TE/H115050.25 ms), the actual pore size and structure are
completely different. It is observed that the unimodal pore struc-
ture exhibits a response at long echo times. Consequently, a more
pronounced difference arises between the oil peak and the water
peak. However, as shown by case C3H4, the pattern is not unique.
Hypothesis 4 (C4H4). Bimodal, diffusively coupled pore struc-
ture partially saturated with light oil. As discussed earlier, a 100-
ms T
2 peak can be the result of diffusion coupling between micro-
and macropores. In the presence of both irreducible water and
partial light-oil saturations, when TE increases, this coupled sys-
tem exhibits an important transfer of magnetization toward short
relaxation times. Transfer of magnetization is such that the pres-
ence of oil is only suggested by a tail toward long T
2 of the total
response at TE/H115054 ms.
Hypothesis 5 (C4H5). This case is constructed with the same
uncoupled pore configuration as in C4H1, except for the partial
saturation of the macroporous region with light oil. By direct com-
parison with the simulation results obtained for case C4H4, we
remark that, as with cases C3H2 and C3H3, the coupled case
C4H4 is not more amenable to fluid-phase discrimination than the
uncoupled case C4H5. However, this fundamental difference,
based on the transfer of the macroporous borne magnetization to
shorter values of T
2, suggests a practical way to discriminate be-
tween the coupled or uncoupled nature of the pore structure.
Conclusions
A novel numerical algorithm was developed to simulate NMR
measurements acquired in the presence of a constant magnetic
field gradient. The geometrical and petrophysical model of rock
formations included dual fluid saturations and dual-porosity struc-
tures exhibiting diffusion coupling.
The algorithm was used to assess the sensitivity of NMR ac-
quisition strategies based on measurements with multiple echo
times. These measurements are generally used in the detection and
quantification of partial hydrocarbon saturation in rock formations.
We focused our simulation and interpretation work on carbonate-
like rocks in which sufficient contrast existed between the molecu-
lar diffusion coefficients of the saturating fluids. It was found that
long TE values could help to unambiguously characterize pore
systems in which light oil fully saturated macropores and brine
fully saturated micropores. However, as soon as diffusion coupling
was present and multiple phases coexisted in the macropore space,
multiple-TE NMR interpretation became ambiguous. The presence
of diffusive coupling enhanced the contrast between water and oil
signals. It was found, however, that information on the hydrocar-
bon grade was required to reach reliable conclusions. Overall, this
exercise showed the value of versatile numerical simulation algo-
rithms like the one described in this paper in the interpretation of
petrophysical properties from NMR measurements.
Nomenclature
D /H11505effective diffusivity, m
2/s
Do /H11505bulk diffusivity, m 2/s
G /H11505strength of external magnetic field gradient applied by
NMR tool, G/cm
p /H11505probability of proton magnetization decay at fluid
surface boundary, dimensionless
R /H11505macroscopic displacement of a step of
First-Passage-Time technique, /H9262m
S/V /H11505surface-to-volume ratio of pore, /H9262m–1
Sw /H11505water saturation, dimensionless
t /H11505time, ms
TE /H11505interecho time of the NMR tool, ms
T2 /H11505total transverse relaxation, ms
T2B /H11505bulk transverse relaxation, ms
T2D /H11505diffusive transverse relaxation, ms
T2S /H11505surface transverse relaxation, ms
/H9004t /H11505duration associated with a First-Passage-Time
technique step, ms
/H9255/H11505unitary displacement of a step of conventional
random-walk technique applied near the pore wall, nm
/H9253/H11505proton gyromagnetic ratio /H115052/H92664258 rad/(G·s)
/H9262/H11505fluid viscosity, cp
/H9267/H11505surface relaxivity, /H9262m/s
/H9278/H11505proton spin phase, rad
Acknowledgments
We express our gratitude to Baker Atlas for partially funding this
work through an internship position offered to Emmanuel Toume-
lin during summer 2001. We would also like to thank Gigi Zhang
and Carl Edwards for their useful discussions. Partial support is
acknowledged from the Center of Excellence in Formation Evalu-
ation of the U. of Texas at Austin and from the American Chemical
242 August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering

--- PAGE 11 ---
Society under grant ACS PRF#37519-AC9. The Center of Excel-
lence in Formation Evaluation is an industry research consortium
jointly sponsored by Baker Atlas, Halliburton, Schlumberger, and
Anadarko Petroleum Corp.
References
1. Chen, S. et al.: “Estimation of Hydrocarbon Viscosity With Multiple-
TE, Dual-TW MRIL Logs, ” SPEREE (December 2000) 498.
2. Akkurt, R. et al. : “Enhanced diffusion: Expand the range of NMR
direct hydrocarbon-typing applications, ” paper GG presented at the
1998 SPWLA Annual Logging Symposium, Keystone, Colorado, 26 –
29 May.
3. Looyestijn, W.J.: “Determination of oil saturation from diffusion NMR
logs,” paper SS presented at the 1996 SPWLA Annual Logging Sym-
posium, New Orleans, 16 –19 June.
4. Ramakrishnan, T.S. et al.: “Forward models for nuclear magnetic reso-
nance in carbonate rocks,” The Log Analyst (July–August 1999) 40, 4.
5. Toumelin, E.: “Monte Carlo simulations of NMR measurements in
carbonate rocks under a constant magnetic field gradient, ” Masters
thesis, the U. of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas (2002).
6. Zheng, L.H. and Chiew, Y.C.: “Computer simulation of diffusion-
controlled reactions in dispersions of spherical sinks, ” J. Chemical
Physics (January 1989) 90, 1.
7. Fukushima, E. and Roeder, S.B.W.: Experimental pulse NMR: a nuts
and bolts approach, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts (1981).
8. Coates, G.R. et al.: “Restrictive Diffusion From Uniform Gradient
NMR Well Logging, ” paper SPE 26472 presented at the 1993 SPE
Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, Houston, 3 –6 October.
9. Gudgjartsson, H. and Patz, S.: “NMR diffusion simulation based on
conditional random walk, ” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging
(December 1995) 14, 4.
10. Bergman, D.J. et al.: “Self-diffusion in a periodic porous medium: a
comparison of different approaches, ” Physical Review E (April 1995)
51, 4.
11. Chen, S. et al.: “Optimization of NMR Logging Acquisition and Pro-
cessing,” paper SPE 56766 presented at the 1999 SPE Annual Tech-
nical Conference and Exhibition, Houston, 3 –6 October.
12. Toumelin, E. et al.: “Reconciling NMR measurements and numerical
simulations: assessment of temperature and diffusive coupling effects
on two-phase carbonate samples, ” Petrophysics (March–April 2003)
44, 2.
SI Metric Conversion Factors
Å × 1.0* E –01 /H11505nm
cp × 1.0* E –03 /H11505Pa/H11080s
ft2 × 9.290 304* E –02 /H11505m2
° F( ° F + 459.67)/1.8 /H11505K
in. × 2.54* E+00 /H11505cm
*Conversion factor is exact.
Emmanuel Toumelin is a research assistant at the U. of Texas at
Austin. e-mail: toumelin@mail.utexas.edu. During his stay at UT,
he has worked as a summer research intern with Schlumberger
and Baker Atlas. His interests include NMR techniques, forma-
tion evaluation, and reservoir characterization. Toumelin is pur-
suing a PhD degree dealing with the joint interpretation of
microscale petrophysics, NMR diffusion, and dielectric rock
properties. He holds an Engineering degree from the Ecole
Centrale de Lille in France and an MS degree in petroleum
engineering from the U. of Texas at Austin.Carlos Torres-Verdín
is an assistant professor in the Dept. of Petroleum and Geosys-
tems Engineering at the U. of Texas at Austin, where he con-
ducts research in formation evaluation and integrated reser-
voir characterization. Previously, he was a research scientist
with Schlumberger-Doll Research and a reservoir specialist and
technology champion with YPF (Buenos Aires). Torres-Verdín
holds a PhD degree in engineering geoscience from the U. of
California, Berkeley. He is currently a member of the SPE Jour-
nal Editorial Board. Songhua Chen is a staff scientist and proj-
ect leader for NMR interpretation development at Baker Atlas
Houston Technology Center. Before joining Baker Atlas, he was
a research scientist with the Texas Engineering Experiment Sta-
tion in College Station, Texas, where he worked in the area of
NMR and MRI applications to flow in porous media. Chen holds
a BS degree from Nanjing Inst. of Technology in China and a
PhD degree from the U. of Utah, both in physics.
243August 2003 SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering
View publication statsView publication stats