--- PAGE 1 ---
Copyright 2002, Society of Petroleum Engineers Inc. 
 
This paper was prepared for presentation at the SPE Annual Technical Conference and 
Exhibition held in San Antonio, Texas, 29 September–2 October 2002. 
 
This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE Program Committee following review of 
information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents of the paper, as 
presented, have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to 
correction by the author(s). The material, as presented, does not necessarily reflect any 
position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Papers presented at 
SPE meetings are subject to publication review by Editorial Committees of the Society of 
Petroleum Engineers. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper 
for commercial purposes without the written consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is 
prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 
words; illustrations may not be copied. The abstract must c ontain conspicuous 
acknowledgment of where and by whom the paper was presented. Write Librarian, SPE, P.O. 
Box 833836, Richardson, TX 75083-3836, U.S.A., fax 01-972-952-9435. 
 
Abstract 
We develop a numerical algorithm to simulate nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements in the presence of 
constant magnetic field gradients. The algorithm is based on 
Monte Carlo conditional random walks in restricted and 
unrestricted space. Simulations can be performed of three-
dimensional (3D) porous media that include both arbitrary 
bimodal pore distributions and multi-phase fluid saturations. 
The ability to account for the pres ence of a constant external 
magnetic field gradient allows us to replicate actual well 
logging conditions that include the effect of CMPG pulse 
sequences at a microscopic level. This is accomplished by 
simulating pulse acquisition techniques that include multiple 
inter-echo times ( TE) similar to those currently used by the 
well-logging industry. Benchmark examples are presented to 
validate the accuracy and internal consistency of our algorithm 
against previously published results for the case of a null 
magnetic field gradient. Valid ation examples are also 
presented against actual NMR measurements performed on 
core samples of carbonate rock formations. 
Interpretation work is focused to the petrophysical 
assessment of both partial oil/water saturations and pore 
structures exhibiting hydraulic coupling. Simulation examples 
are designed to quantify whether the inclusion of diffusion 
under a magnetic field gradient can improve the interpretation 
of multi-phase fluid saturations when hydraulic coupling is 
significant. The simulation algorithm sheds light to new NMR 
data acquisition strategies that could be used to improve the 
detection and quantification of (a) fluid types, (b) complex 
fluid saturations, and (c) complex pore geometries. 
Introduction 
Presence of hydraulic (or diffusion) pore coupling in 
carbonate rocks (mainly grainstones) challenges conventional 
NMR interpretation techniques. Although pore coupling 
phenomena are commonplace in th e majority of rock pore 
systems, they become relevant to assess NMR measurements 
when the following three c onditions are met: (a) micro-
porosity regions are present within the grains, (b) micro-pores 
are hydraulically well connected (not cemented) to outer 
macro-porous regions exhibiting low surface-to-volume ratios, 
and (c) rock surface relaxivity is low enough to prevent decay 
of proton magnetization within the macro-porosity before 
protons can enter the micro-porous regions. In addition, fluid 
diffusivity must be sufficiently large in order for hydraulic 
coupling to be significant within the time scale of NMR 
measurements. This is usually the case only for water and light 
hydrocarbons. As a result, fluid magnetization will be 
exchanged between micro- and macro-pore regions, and no 
obvious relationship will exist between NMR transverse 
relaxation (T
2) distribution and pore-size distribution. Figure 
1 illustrates conditions (a) and (b) described above with an 
example of scanning electron mi croscope (SEM) images of a 
carbonate rock exhibiting hydraulic coupling. 
Varying inter-echo times ( TE) is a common NMR data 
acquisition technique used for in-situ reservoir fluid 
identification1,2,3. However, in the case of NMR measurements 
performed in carbonate rocks, there exist no published reports 
dealing with the impact of diffusion coupling on hydrocarbon 
typing and quantification using multiple- TE logging 
techniques. The objectives of this paper are twofold: (a) to 
develop a simulation algorithm capable of reproducing NMR 
measurements in complex pore geometries under a variety of 
experimental conditions and, in particular, under the influence 
of a constant magnetic field gradient, and (b) to provide 
simulation examples that will help assess the validity of fluid 
phase discrimination using multi- TE measurements in porous 
media exhibiting hydraulic coupling. 
In the past, numerical models of NMR decay have been 
proposed based on periodic bimodal packs of spheres that 
accounted for surface relaxation e ffects. We have reproduced 
and extended Ramakrishnan et al.
4’s Monte Carlo algorithm to 
account for the effect of an external constant magnetic field 
 
SPE 77399 
Quantification of Multi-Phase Fluid Saturations in Complex Pore Geometries From 
Simulations of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Measurements 
E. Toumelin, SPE, C. Torres-Verdín, SPE, The University of Texas at Austin, and S. Chen, SPE, Baker Atlas 

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 E. TOUMELIN, C. TORRES-VERDIN, AND S. CHEN SPE 77399 
gradient of the type enforced by modern NMR tools, and in 
the presence of a non-wetting phase. The first part of this 
paper introduces the Monte Carlo simulation algorithm 
applicable to a bimodal pack of spheres in the presence of a 
constant magnetic field gradient. A subsequent section 
describes examples of numerical simulation that illustrate the 
versatility of the algorithm. Finally, we derive and interpret 
simulation examples intended to address specific issues of 
fluid discrimination using multiple inter-echo times in the 
presence of diffusion coupling. We address four specific cases 
of NMR T
2 distributions (two unimodal and two bimodal) by 
modeling several possible combinations of pore structure, 
hydraulic coupling, and fluid distribution. These case studies 
were designed such that different pore configurations created 
identical NMR signal at low values of TE, but did exhibit 
differences at high values of TE. 
 
Model for the Simulation of NMR Decay 
The algorithm developed to simulate numerically NMR 
magnetization decay in carbonate rocks makes use of 
conditional Monte Carlo random walks. It is based on the 
algorithm presented by Ramakrishnan et al.
4, further 
generalized to include a microscopic description of diffusivity 
effects in the presence of a constant magnetic field gradient
5. 
The porous medium can either include micro-and macro-
porous regions (grainstone model) to form a bimodal pore 
distribution, or can exhibit a single pore size with solid grains 
(wackestone model). 
 
Model geometry. The simulation model was constructed with 
a three-dimensional (3D) bimodal pack of spheres that 
replicates the complex pore-structure geometry encountered in 
some carbonate formations, namely micro-porous grainstones, 
where the solid micro-grains are arranged into packs. As in the 
example shown in Fig. 1 , the model adopted for the 
simulations accounts for a micro-porosity region immediately 
surrounding the grains, while different types of macro-
porosities (characterized by different sizes and degrees of 
cementation, depending on diagenesis) exist between the 
packs. The geometrical construction of the 3D model of a 
bimodal pack of spheres is based on the following 
assumptions: 
- Bimodal pore-size distribution, 
- Periodic geometry, 
- Isotropic pores, 
- Spherical, compacted micro-grains, and 
- Spherical, compacted grain packs. 
At the micro- (respectively, macro-) scale, each grain 
(respectively, grain pack) of the model is defined as a sphere 
inscribed into a concentric cubic cell. If the sphere does not 
completely fill its cubic unit, then the complementary volume 
is considered filled with fluids. Furthermore, fixed blobs 
centered in the macro-pore space can be included in the model 
to represent partial saturations of immiscible non-wetting oil 
phase, while the micro-porosity can only be filled with 
irreducible water. Figure 2 shows a 3D period of the assumed 
bimodal pore structure. A large variety of pore sizes can be 
modeled by adjusting the values of the grain (or grain pack) 
radii, and the sizes of the corresponding cubic cells. 
Unimodal pore-size distributions can be constructed with 
the same basic model by allowing no micro-porosity. The 
NMR response of uncoupled bimodal pore structures, i.e., 
porous media where no hydraulic coupling occurs, can be 
simulated by superimposing th e response of each isolated 
pore mode. 
 
Dual random-walk strategy. At each iteration of the NMR 
numerical simulation algorithm, a fictitious proton is 
randomly chosen in the available pore space. This proton is 
thereafter displaced to a new lo cation yielded by a continuous 
random walk operating according to two possible strategies. 
Depending on the proximity of the proton to the surface of 
material discontinuity (pore wall or fluid phase interface), 
either a conventional random-walk strategy, or Zheng and 
Chiew’s First-Passage-Time technique
6 can be implemented to 
displace the proton to its new location. 
The First-Passage-Time strategy was developed to allow 
macroscopic jumps in the bulk pore space and hence to speed 
up the otherwise prohibitively long random-walk process. It is 
based on the analytical solution of the unbounded diffusivity 
equation, which yields a stochastic relationship between the 
mean square displacement, < R 
2 >, during a given step, and its 
duration, ∆t, with a maximum of probability close to the free 
space bulk diffusivity, i.e., 
t
RDo
∆
><= 6
2
. (1) 
Figure 3 illustrates the selection of the random walk 
strategy according to the dist ance between the particles and 
the surrounding fluid boundaries . Grain surface and fluid 
interfaces constitute the wetting phase boundaries, whereas 
only the interface between fluids constitutes a non-wetting 
phase boundary). 
 
Model of diffusive relaxation. In general , the apparent 
transversal relaxation time T
2 of the decay of magnetization 
signal can be written as: 
DBS TTTT 2222
1111 ++= , (2) 
where T2S is the surface relaxation, T2B the bulk relaxation, and 
T2D the decay rate due to di ffusion in the presence of a 
gradient field (diffusive relaxation). The Monte Carlo 
algorithm described by Ramakrishnan et al. 4 takes into 
account the effect of surface re laxation, but does not include 
the effect of bulk or diffusive relaxations. On the one hand, 
T2B is governed by fluid properties, regardless of time or 
geometry, and therefore can be applied independently from the 
Monte Carlo simulation process. On the other hand, T2D 
depends on both NMR experiment al parameters (i.e., inter-
echo time TE and gradient strength G), and the effective fluid 
diffusivity D, as suggested by the macroscopic expression 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 QUANTIFICATION OF MULTIPHASE FLUID SATURATIONS IN COMPLEX PORE GEOMETRIES 
SPE 77399 FROM SIMULATIONS OF NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE MEASUREMENTS 3 
1222
2
12
−





= DTEGT D
γ , (3) 
where γ is the proton gyromagnetic ratio. When molecules 
diffuse through restricted geometries, the otherwise free 
diffusion is hindered and this causes the observed apparent 
diffusivity to become time and geometry dependent 7. The 
effective diffusivity D decays from the bulk (free space) value 
Do at a rate which depends on tortuosity, time, and pore 
surface-to-volume ratio. Within micro-porous regions in the 
micrometer range, for instance, the decay of D is 
instantaneous to reach an asymptotic value equal to the inverse 
of the tortuosity of the medium. By considering the diversity 
of pore sizes within carbonate rocks, it then becomes 
necessary to track the diffusivity effect through the random 
walk in order to model diffusive relaxation. 
Since the magnetization signal acquired by the NMR tool 
is proportional to the cosine of the spin phases of the fluid 
protons, we designed the algorithm such that it could track the 
spin dephasing caused by the constant magnetic field gradient. 
At time t, a proton spin phase is given by the integral 
∫∫ =⋅=
tt
dttzGdttt
00
')'(')'()( γγφ rG , (4) 
where r is the position of the proton, and the gradient vector G 
is assumed to point in the z-direction. Due to the stochastic 
nature of the displacement z while using the First-Passage-
Time technique, the evaluation of the integral of equation (4) 
is not trivial. To circumvent this problem, we made use of the 
phase-shift expression derive d by Gudgjartsson and Patz
8, 
which is based on a stochastic formulation of the phase shift 
created by the gradient. This phase-tracking strategy was 
designed to honor the CPMG sequence with a sampling rate 
TE, as described below. 
 
Simulation algorithm. The following algorithmic sequence 
was applied for each proton a nd at each random-walk step, i, 
to account for the selection of a displacement strategy and of a 
CPMG sampling protocol: 
1. Determine the distance d to the closest material 
interface 
2. If d is large, then the proton movement is inscribed in 
free space and the First-Passage-Time technique is 
applied
4,6. Due to the constraint of the TE sequence, 
the duration ∆t is such that it cannot extend beyond a 
half-TE period. 
3. If d is small, then the above algorithm does not 
converge. Therefore, it must be substituted by a 
conventional random-walk strategy with fixed 
infinitesimal displacement ε. 
4. Regardless of d, the phase shift acquired during this 
step is given by
8
: 
() ( ) () ii
ii
ii ttztzztzGtt −




 −+−+= +
+
+ 1
1
1
2
)0()()0()()()( γφφ
Normal()6
)( 3
1 iio ttDG −+ +γ , (5) 
where ti, ti+1 and 0 are the initial instant of the step, 
the final instant of the step, and the time origin, 
respectively. In equation (5 ), Normal() is a Gaussian 
probability density function of zero mean and unity 
variance. 
5. When nTEti =+1 , where n is an integer, the phase 
cosine (i.e., the magnetization of the particle at time 
nTE) is recorded and added to the sum of signals of 
all the protons simulated at time nTE. 
6. When TEnti )( 21
1 +=+ , where n is an integer, the 
phase is reversed to honor the RF ( π)y re-polarizing 
CPMG magnetic pulses. 
7. If contact is made with a surface of material 
discontinuity (either gr ain or interface between 
immiscible fluids), then the proton magnetization 
decays with a probability equal to9 
oDp ρε= , (6) 
where ρ is the surface relaxivity of the interface. If no 
magnetization decay occurs, then the proton rebounds 
specularly at the surface of the interface. 
Once a large-enough number of proton trajectories are 
simulated with the Monte Carlo algorithm, convergence to the 
average time solution is insured and a total magnetization 
signal is output. Generally, a few hundreds to a thousand 
proton trajectories are needed for convergence, depending on 
the modeled pore-size distribution. The magnetization signal 
is subsequently inverted into a transverse relaxation ( T
2) 
distribution by means of a curvature-smoothing 
regularization10 generally used to invert noisy experimental 
NMR magnetization decays. Figure 4 is a flowchart that 
graphically describes the details of the Monte-Carlo algorithm. 
 
 
Testing and Generalization of the Algorithm. 
Effect of surface relaxivity on hydraulic pore coupling in 
the absence of a magnetic field gradient. In order to 
establish a reference for non-gradient experiments, we first 
conducted NMR simulations to illustrate the effect of surface 
relaxivity ρ on diffusion coupling. An inter-echo time TE=1 
ms was adopted in the presence of a null magnetic field 
gradient. Figure 5 shows an excellent agreement between our 
simulation results and those published by Ramakrishnan et al.
4 
for similar geometrical and fluid properties. A limitation exists 
to the accuracy of our simulations for small TE sampling in 
the case of large values of ρ. The principle of hydraulic pore 
coupling is brought to light by considering the spatial 
molecular dispersion illustrated of Fig. 6 . Hydraulic pore 

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 E. TOUMELIN, C. TORRES-VERDIN, AND S. CHEN SPE 77399 
coupling increases when ρ decreases: the smaller the value of 
ρ, the higher the proton exchange, and therefore the higher the 
magnetization exchange between pores. 
 
Effect of dual fluid saturation on the NMR response of 
coupled pore modes. When immiscible oil blobs are included 
in the model, the amount of wetting water available for 
coupled magnetization is naturally reduced. Therefore, the less 
the water saturation (Sw), the less the transfer of magnetization 
between the two pore scales, thereby rendering diffusion 
coupling negligible. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 7. 
Again, our simulation results are in very good agreement with 
those published by Ramakrishnan et al.
 4 
 
Comparison with analytical relaxation in free diffusion. To 
test the consistency and accur acy of the dephasing and phase-
reversing strategies included in our NMR simulation 
algorithm, an unbounded medium was simulated with grain 
diameters tending to zero for both 1-cp and 6-cp oils, at a 
temperature of 370 K. Results from this simulation exercise 
are shown in Fig. 8. An almost perfect agreement is found 
between the macroscopic anal ytical expression given in 
equation (4), and the microscopic numerical results provided 
by our Monte Carlo simulation algorithm. Once bulk 
relaxation is applied to the results of the simulations, the 
match with analytical values, i.e., 1/(1/ T
2B+1/T2D), is 
even closer. 
 
Example of simulations of NMR measurements acquired 
in a coupled carbonate rock. Under the assumption of 
hydraulic coupling between existing pore modes, we reached 
very good agreements between experimental and simulation 
results. For instance, we were able to consistently calibrate the 
sphere-pack simulation model to geometrical pore core data
11. 
Figure 9 provides an example of such simulations results. The 
numerical simulations compare very well to experimental 
NMR measurements, including the case in which a magnetic 
field gradient is present. Based on the temperature dependence 
of the parameters D
o and T2B used in the simulation algorithm, 
we were able to assess the relative effects of diffusion 
coupling and temperature on NMR measurements11. 
 
Application of the Simulation Algorithm to Fluid 
Discrimination with Multiple TE Measurements. 
NMR T2 distributions acquired in carbonate formations often 
exhibit either a unimodal or a bimodal pattern. Other than the 
trivial case in which the saturating fluid is irreducible water, 
the interpretation of unimodal and bimodal distributions is not 
straightforward in the presence of non-negligible pore-
coupling effects. Further, when both wetting (water) and non-
wetting (oil) phases are present, the overall T
2 distribution is 
collectively influenced by all of these mechanisms. Previous 
work on using multiple- TE logging measurements to identify 
oil saturation and viscosities 1,2,3 was entirely based on the 
assumption of uncoupled systems. Several NMR simulation 
examples were designed in oil/water systems to assess pore-
coupling effects on multiple- TE NMR data acquisition 
techniques used for hydrocarbon typing. 
We consider four central case studies for the 
simulation/interpretation studies reported in this paper. The 
four cases are classified according to the T
2 distribution 
pattern measured at inter-echo echo times of 0.25 ms, and 
assuming a magnetic field gradient strength of 15 G/cm. 
Simulation results are obtained for inter-echo times of 1 and 4 
ms. According to the formulated hypotheses described below, 
the models used in the simulations account for either a single 
pore size (for unimodal and uncoupled bimodal structures) or 
else two coupled pore sizes (for coupled bimodal structures). 
The nominal pore sizes, as defined on the corresponding pore-
size distributions of Fig. 10 through 13, were obtained by 
adjusting the geometrical dimensions of the unit cells of the 
periodic models. In all cases, the ratio between grain diameter 
and concentric cube side was ke pt constant and equal to 1.23, 
the surface relaxivity at the interface between fluids was 
neglected, and the grain surface re laxivity was held equal to 3 
µm/s. Both light (1.5 cp) and medium (6 cp) oil grades were 
considered as non-wetting flui ds, whose bulk properties are 
summarized in Table 1. 
 
Case 1: Single T
2 peak at high T2 values (1000 ms). 
(Fig. 10) 
Hypothesis 1 (C1H1): Unimodal pore size distribution 
only filled with water. The T2 peak shifts to the left due to the 
increased role played by T2D on the NMR time relaxation for 
TE=4 ms. 
Hypothesis 2 (C1H2): Same as C1H1, but including blobs 
of light oil in the pores. At low TE values, the light-oil bulk 
relaxation equals the surface relaxation of the water filling the 
rest of the pore space. In comparison with C1H1, this oil grade 
decays slower than wa ter with increasing TE. However, the 
difference in total signal is not noticeable. 
 
Case 2: Single T2 peak at average T2 values (200 ms). 
(Fig. 11) 
Hypothesis 1 (C2H1): Unimodal pore size distribution 
filled with only water. The nominal pore size is smaller than in 
C1H1. 
Hypothesis 2 (C2H2): Comparable to C1H2, but with a 
medium-grade oil and a slightly smaller pore size than in 
C1H2. Oil bulk relaxation is assumed equal to water surface 
relaxation within the comp lementary pore space. The 
dominant oil saturation dictates the NMR behavior of the 
entire system. Since the bulk relaxation of the prominent oil 
saturation has a magnitude similar to its diffusive relaxation in 
bulk space (i.e., D~D
o), the increment in echo time only 
slightly modifies its T2 peak value. We remark that the total 
black curve shown in the corresponding panel of Fig. 12 
represents the joint response due to both fluids, and masks the 
NMR response of water peaking at T
2=100 ms (as in the case 
C2H1). 
Hypothesis 3 (C2H3): Bimodal, coupled pore structure 
with micro- and macro-porosity regions, containing water 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 QUANTIFICATION OF MULTIPHASE FLUID SATURATIONS IN COMPLEX PORE GEOMETRIES 
SPE 77399 FROM SIMULATIONS OF NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE MEASUREMENTS 5 
only. This pore system behaves in similar fashion to the 
unimodal C2H1 case described above, except for the case 
TE=4 ms in which the T2 peak’s relaxation time is equal to 
half of that obtained for C2H1 (55 ms vs. 100 ms). This means 
that hydraulically coupled pores manifest themselves as longer 
diffusion lengths, whereupon their magnetization signal 
decays faster than the equivale nt signal due to hydraulically 
uncoupled systems. In hydraulically uncoupled systems, the 
macro-pores maintain the total T2 response at values higher 
than that of micro-pores, whereas in hydraulically coupled 
systems the contribution due to micro-pore dominates the 
diffusive process thereby leading to lower decay times. 
Hypothesis 4 (C2H4): Bimodal, coupled pore structure 
including medium-grade oil in the macro-porous regions. The 
oil bulk relaxation is close to that of the coupled response 
described for C2H3. The presence of medium oil maintains 
the relaxation value of the T
2 peak of the entire system higher 
than its value in C2H3, hence equal to that of the unimodal 
pores of case C2H1. Since oil o ccupies part of the macro-pore 
space, less space is available fo r water, whereupon hydraulic 
coupling becomes weak. On the one hand, presence of residual 
water causes lower decay times because the proportion of 
micro-porous borne water is higher in the coupling mode. On 
the other hand, the oil phase exhibits a T
2 shift much lower 
than water when TE increases. Collectively, these two adverse 
effects make the T2 response of the system just slightly more 
spread than that of case C2H1. 
 
Case 3: Double T2 peak at low and high values of T2 (50 
and 1000 ms). (Fig. 12) As mentioned previously, the short T2 
peak can be solely due to irreducible fluid. Hence, this 
configuration can only be representative of uncoupled pore 
systems, or else coupled systems that remain effectively 
uncoupled by the complete oil saturation of the macro-pores. 
Therefore, this case is more typical of water-oil mixtures. 
Hypothesis 1 (C3H1): Bimodal uncoupled pore size 
distribution, filled with water only. The two distinct T
2 peaks 
originating from the pore size segregation converge into a 
single peak when T2D dominates the NMR response of the 
system. 
Hypothesis 2 (C3H2): Bimodal uncoupled pore structure 
with partial saturation of medium oil. Due to the contrast of 
relaxation times of the two fluids, for TE=0.25 ms, between 
the oil peak (in red) and the water peaks ( cf. C3H1), the 
response of the entire system causes a shift of the T2 value of 
its macro-porosity peak (500 ms vs. 1000 ms for full water 
saturation). When TE increases, this shift is reinforced and 
splits the magnetization between two modes for TE=4 ms. 
Hypothesis 3 (C3H3): Same configuration as in C3H2, but 
with light oil. The fact that light-oil bulk relaxation is closer to 
1000 ms than that of medium oil causes the NMR response at 
low echo time to be the same as that for full water saturation 
(C3H1). However, a large T
2 spread appears at the longest echo 
times where, on the contrary, water alone causes a sharp, 
selective T2 decay. The difference between this and the medium 
oil case C3H2 is very subtle and requires further inspection. 
Hypothesis 4 (C3H4): Bimodal coupled or uncoupled pore 
structure, with complete light-oil saturation of the macro-
pores. This case is mainly ch aracterized by a complete 
segregation of the oil and water T2 peaks at large echo times. 
Given the important size contrast between micro- and macro-
pores (a factor of 40), such a situation provides obvious 
evidence of the complete satura tion of the macro pores with 
light oil (see also C4H2). Case C3H4 represents a good-
quality oil reservoir with no free water, in which case diffusive 
coupling has a negligible impact on NMR interpretation. 
 
Case 4: Double T2 peak at average and high values of T2 
(100 and 1000 ms). (Fig. 13) 
Hypothesis 1 (C4H1): Bimodal uncoupled system, same as 
C3H1 but with larger micro-pores (which become meso pores). 
Hypothesis 2 (C4H2): Same configuration as C3H4, with 
light oil and meso-pores instead of micro-pores. The ratio of 
macro- to meso-pore size is smaller (i.e., 15) than the ratio of 
macro- to micro-pore size of case C3H4 (i.e., 40). This 
difference is enough to explain the fact that in case C3H4 two 
distinct peaks appear for TE=4 ms, whereas in case C4H2 the 
water magnetization exhibits d ecay times too close from the 
oil magnetization. In consequence, the total system response 
exhibits a single, largely spread T2 peak. We conclude that the 
criterion of reservoir quality derived in case C3H4 (two 
distinct T2 peaks at long TE) is only valid in the presence of 
micro-porosity. 
Hypothesis 3 (C4H3): Unimodal pore structure, partially 
filled with light oil. The main objective of this simulation case 
is explore a difference with case C4H2 where, despite the 
same effective pore size left for water (same peak relaxation at 
TE=0.25 ms), the actual pore size and structure are completely 
different. It is observed that the unimodal pore structure 
exhibits a response at long echo times. Consequently, a more 
pronounced difference arises between the oil peak and the 
water peak. However, as shown by case C3H4, the pattern is 
not unique. 
Hypothesis 4 (C4H4): Bimodal, hydraulically coupled 
pore structure partially saturated with light oil. As discussed 
earlier, a 100-ms T
2 peak can be the result of hydraulic 
coupling between micro- and macro-pores. In the presence of 
both irreducible water and partial light oil saturation, when TE 
increases this coupled system exhibits an important transfer of 
magnetization toward short relaxation times. Transfer of 
magnetization is such that the presence of oil is only 
evidenced by a tail toward long T
2 of the total response at high 
values of TE. 
Hypothesis 5 (C4H5): This case is constructed with the 
same uncoupled pore configuration as in C4H1, except for the 
partial saturation of the macro-porous region with light oil. By 
direct comparison with the simulation results obtained for case 
C4H4, we remark that, in similarity with cases C3H2/C3H3, 
the coupled case C4H4 is not more amenable to phase 
discrimination than the uncoupled case C4H5. However, this 
fundamental difference, based on the transfer of the macro-
porous borne magnetization to shorter values of T
2, suggests a 

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 E. TOUMELIN, C. TORRES-VERDIN, AND S. CHEN SPE 77399 
practical way to discriminate between the coupled or 
uncoupled nature of the pore structure. 
 
Conclusions 
A novel numerical algorithm was developed to simulate NMR 
measurements acquired in the presence of a constant magnetic 
field gradient. The geometrical and petrophysical model of 
rock formations included dua l fluid saturations and dual 
porosity structures. We applied this simulation algorithm to a 
number of examples of porous media systems and successfully 
reproduced actual NMR measurements acquired in complex 
pore geometries exhibiting hydraulic coupling among primary 
and secondary pores. 
The algorithm was used to assess the influence of multi 
inter-echo times in the detection and quantification of partial 
oil- and water-phase saturations in carbonate rocks. We 
focused our simulation and interpretation work to cases where 
a sufficient contrast existed be tween the molecular diffusivity 
of the saturating fluids. It was found that presence of full light 
oil saturation in the macro-pores together with water-filled 
micro-porosity was evidenced by a clear distinction of the 
corresponding T
2 peaks at long values of TE. We also found 
that the presence of diffusive coupling can help to discriminate 
oil from water. It was observed that it is not always the best 
choice to use long values of TE for oil identification and 
saturation estimation in coupled pore systems. Such a standard 
discrimination method applied to coupled structures may not 
be suitable for the interpretation of uncoupled pore structures. 
However, the difference in the NMR response from these two 
pore systems (coupled and uncoupl ed) constitutes by itself a 
hint to the geometrical properties of the pore structure. 
 
Nomenclature 
∆t = duration associated with a First-Passage-Time technique 
step (ms) 
ε = unitary displacement of a step of conventional random-
walk technique applied near the pore wall (nm) 
γ = proto n gyromagnetic ratio = 2π 4258 rad/(G.s) 
η = fluid viscosity (cp) 
ρ = surface relaxivity (µm/s) 
φ = proton spin phase (rad) 
D = effective diffusivity (m
2
/s) 
Do = bulk diffusivity (m
2
/s) 
G = strength of external magnetic field gradient applied by 
NMR tool (G/cm) 
p = probability of proton ma gnetization decay at fluid 
surface boundary 
R = macroscopic displacement of a step of First-Passage-
Time technique (nm) 
S/V = surface-to-volume ratio of pore ( µm-1) 
Sw = water saturation 
Swir = irreducible water saturation 
t = time (ms) 
T2 = total transverse relaxation (ms) 
T2B = bulk transverse relaxation (ms) 
T2D = diffusive transverse relaxation (ms) 
T2S = surface transverse relaxation (ms) 
TE = inter-echo time of the NMR tool (ms) 
 
Acknowledgements 
We express our gratitude to Baker Atlas for partially funding 
this work through an internsh ip position offered to ET during 
the Summer 2001. We also like to thank Drs. Gigi Zhang and 
Carl Edwards for useful discussions. Partial support is 
acknowledged from the Center of Excellence in Formation 
Evaluation of The University of Texas at Austin, and from the 
American Chemical Society under grant ACS PRF#37519-
AC9. The Center of Excellence in Formation Evaluation is an 
industry research consortium jointly sponsored by Baker 
Atlas, Halliburton, Schlumberger, and Anadarko. 
 
References 
1 Chen, S., Georgi, D. T., Olima, O., Gamin, H., and Minetto, J. 
C.: “Estimation of hydrocarbon viscosity with multiple-TE, 
dual-TW MRIL logs”, SPE Reservoir evaluation and 
engineering (December 2000), 3, 6. 
2 Akkurt, R., et al. : “Enhanced diffusion: Expand the range of 
NMR direct hydrocarbon-typing applications”, paper GG 
presented at the 1998 SPWLA Annual Logging Symposium, 
Keystone, Colorado, May 26-29. 
3 Looyestijn, W. J.: “Determination of oil saturation from 
diffusion NMR logs”, paper SS presented at the 1996 SPWLA 
Annual Logging Symposium, Ne w Orleans, Louisiana, 
June 16-19. 
4 Ramakrisnan, T. S., Schwartz, L. M., Fordham, E. J., Kenyon, 
W. E., and Wilkinson, D. J.: “Forward models for nuclear 
magnetic resonance in carbonate rocks”, The Log Analyst (July-
August 1999), 40, 4. 
5 Toumelin, E.: Monte Carlo simu lations of NMR measurements 
in carbonate rocks under a constant magnetic field gradient, 
Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX (2002). 
6 Zheng, L. H., and Chiew, Y. C.: “Computer simulation of 
diffusion-controlled reactions in di spersions of spherical sinks”, 
Journal of Chemical Physics (1989), 90, 1. 
7 Coates, G. R., Vinegar, H. J., Tu tunjian, P. N., and Gardner, J. 
S.: “Restrictive diffusion from uniform gradient NMR well 
logging”, SPE 26472, 1993. 
8 Gudgjartsson, H., and Patz, S.: “NMR diffusion simulation 
based on conditional random walk”, IEEE Transactions on 
medical imaging (December 1995), 14, 4.Bergman, D. J., Dunn, 
K.-J., Schwartz, L. M., and Mitra, P. P.: “Self-diffusion in a 
periodic porous medium: a comparison of different approaches”, 
Physical Review E (April 1995) 51, 4. 
9 Bergman, D. J., Dunn, K.-J., Schw artz, L. M., and Mitra, P. P.: 
“Self-diffusion in a periodic porous medium: a comparison of 
different approaches”, Physical Review E (April 1995) 51, 4. 
10 Chen, S., Fang, S., Georgi, D. T., Salyer, J., and Shorey, D.: 
“Optimization of NMR Logging Acquisition and Processing”, 
paper SPE 56766 presented at the 1999 SPE Annual Technical 
Conference and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, October 3-6. 
11 Toumelin, E., Torres-Verdín, C., Chen, S., Fischer, D. M.: 
“Analysis of NMR diffusion c oupling effects in two-phase 
carbonate rocks: comparison of measurements with Monte Carlo 
simulations”: paper JJJ presented at the 2002 SPWLA Annual 
Logging Symposium, Oiso, Japan, June 2-5. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 QUANTIFICATION OF MULTIPHASE FLUID SATURATIONS IN COMPLEX PORE GEOMETRIES 
SPE 77399 FROM SIMULATIONS OF NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE MEASUREMENTS 7 
 
 
Fluid η (cp) at 370 K Do (µm
2
/ms) T2B (ms) 
Brine 
(water) 
1 2.5 3700 
Light oil 1.5 1 1000 
Medium oil 6 0.27 250 
 
Table 1: Summary of bulk fluid properties used for 
the simulation of NMR fluid saturation effects 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: SEM images of carbonate rock at 140x (top panel) and 
1400x (bottom panel) magnifications. A dual porosity structure is 
clearly evidenced at these two scales: from a diagenetic 
viewpoint, the grains seen on the top panel were micritized into 
micro-grains as evidenced on the bottom panel. Therefore, the 
solid matrix is formed by micro-grains agglomerated into packs 
or pseudo (micro-porous) macro-grains. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 E. TOUMELIN, C. TORRES-VERDIN, AND S. CHEN SPE 77399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Three-dimensional representation of the distribution of 
fluids and rock matrix at the spatial resolution of both macro- 
and micro-cells. Gas blobs are centered in the macro-pores. 
Grain compaction is simulated by assigning sphere diameters 
larger than the concentric cube sizes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legend: 
 
 matrix skeleton material discontinuity surface 
 
First-Passage-Time 
technique used in: 
Conventional random-walk 
used in: 
 
water-filled micro-porosity 
(example of particle P
1) 
water-filled porosity (at interface 
between water and matrix or oil) 
 
water-filled macro-porosity 
(example of particle P2) 
oil blob (at interface between 
water and oil) 
 
oil blob 
(example of particle P3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Fraction of a cross-section taken through a pack period. The graph illustrates the criterion used to select a specific random-walk 
technique according to the location of the particles at the onset of the walk step. A nominal distance of 3 ε is taken as the safety thickness 
within which the First-Passage-Time technique reverses to a conventional random walk. A wetting layer of thickness LW is also included in 
order to constrain the rock wettability at the surface of the micro-porous grain (grain pack). 
Oil 
Water-filled 
macro-
porosity 
Water-filled 
micro-
porosity 
Grain 
Top view 
 
+ 
Cmacro 
 
P2 
 
+ 
Oil blob Water 
+ 
Cmicro 
+ 
dmacro 
dblob 
dmicro 
3ε 
3ε 
3ε 
LW 
Water 
Cblob 
P1 
P3 
+ 
+ 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 QUANTIFICATION OF MULTIPHASE FLUID SATURATIONS IN COMPLEX PORE GEOMETRIES 
SPE 77399 FROM SIMULATIONS OF NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE MEASUREMENTS 9 
t=0 t=TE t=2TE …
Echo 1 Echo 2
π-pulse 1 π -pulse 2
…
dmaxsmall?
Conventional Random Walk
j = 1, n = 1, t1 = 0, φ = 0 
i = i + 1
Particle i: initial position Pi randomly drawn in pore space
Step j: at onset: Position Pj (3-D)
Walk time tj
j = j + 1
First Arrival Technique
(Zheng and Chiew, 1988)Yes No
Model GeometryCPMG Sequence
Uniformly 
distributed 
random 
variable
x
Take <r 2> = dmax2
∆t = duration of 
macroscopic step
<r 2> = mean square 
displacement of the 
largest jump from P
j
Do = bulk diffusivity
∆t= x <r2> / Do
< ∆tmax?
Take ∆t= ∆tmax
so that step j 
stops at nTE
then
<r 2> = Do ∆t/ x
•Spherical 3D displacement of radius √<r2> Æ new position Pj+1
Time increment ∆t Æ new walk time tj+1 = tj + ∆t
Dephasing∆φ Æ new phase φj+1= φj + ∆φ
Spherical 3-D displacement of radius ε
Æ new position Pj+1
Æ new walk time tj+1 = tj + ε2/ 6Do
Pj+1outside of 
fluid-filled space?
Calculate: dmax= distance to nearest interface
∆tmax= time lapse until next TE echo (t=nTE)
Specular 
rebound at 
fluid phase 
boundary 
Æ new 
position Pj+1
Probability 
p = ρε / Do
honored?
nTE∈ ]tj, tj+1]?
Generate 
uniformly 
distributed 
variable
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Number of 
particles reached?
T2
inversion
YesNo
ρ = surface 
relaxivity
Do = bulk 
diffusivity
Total magnetizationTE 2TE 3TE …nTE
time
START
Total magnetizationTE 2TE 3TE …nTE
time
(n-1/2)TE 
= tj+1?
Cross π-pulse 
Reverse the phase
-φj+1 Æ φj+1
10 100 1000 10000..
T2
(ms)
Porosity amplitude
Magnetization signal created by 
particle i at time nTE = cos(φj+1)
n = n + 1
Multiply by
exp(-t/T2B)
Yes
No
(n-1/2)TE 
∈ ]tj, tj+1]?
Cross π-
pulse 
Reverse 
the phase
-φj+1 Æ φj+1
Yes
No
Particle decays 
at contact
between 
trajectory [Pj
Pj+1] and 
material 
boundary 
surface
Dephasing∆φ
Æ new phase 
φj+1= φj + ∆φ
() ( ) () jj
jj ttzzzzG −




 −+−=∆ +
+
1
010
2γφ
zPz
ttDG
kk
iio
⋅=
−+ +
 w ith 
Nor ma l ( ) ,6
)( 3
1γ
i = i + 1
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: Flowchart of the NMR simulation algorithm used for each fluid phase. In the descriptions, n is the echo index of the CP MG sampling, 
i is the particle index, j is the step index along particle i’s walk, P j is the 3D position of particle i at the onset of step j, t j is the walk time of 
particle i at the onset of step j, and φj is the spin phase of particle i at the onset of step j. 
Simulated NMR decay accounting for 
surface and diffusive relaxations 
Simulated NMR decay also 
including bulk relaxation 
Simulated NMR T2 distribution 

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 E. TOUMELIN, C. TORRES-VERDIN, AND S. CHEN SPE 77399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5: Comparison of simulations of NMR data transformed into equivalent pore-size distributions. (a) Simulations performed wi th our 
simulation program, and (b) simula tions reported by Ramakrishnan et al .
4
, using a single water phase and different values of surface 
relaxivity ρ. Equivalent pore-size distributions were obtained by multiplying ρ and simulated T2 distributions, and exhibit the importance of ρ 
in NMR diffusion coupling. Although our algorithm is unable to detect low T2 values in the theoretical case of high ρ values, the agreement 
between the two sets of simulations is remarkable. 
 
 
 
Fig. 6: Illustration of the spatial dispersion of fluid particles as a function of surface 
relaxitivity ρ. Initially, within a period of the dual pack of spheres, dark red dots 
indicate locations of particles borne by the micro-pore space, whereas light green 
dots indicate locations of particles borne by the macro-pore space. Final particle 
positions are either the locations of the particles at their decay, or else current 
locations of non-decayed particles decayed after a 1-second lapse. 
ρ=1.5µm/s 
ρ=7.5µm/s 
ρ=37.5µm/s 
ρ=187.5µm/s 
ρ=937.5µm/s 
(b) Results of Ramakrishnan et al. 
(a) Results of our simulations 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 QUANTIFICATION OF MULTIPHASE FLUID SATURATIONS IN COMPLEX PORE GEOMETRIES 
SPE 77399 FROM SIMULATIONS OF NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE MEASUREMENTS 11 
 
 
 
Fig. 7: Effect of non-wetting oil saturations on the NMR response 
of hydraulically coupled systems. Simulation results of (a) our 
algorithm. and (b) Ramakrishnan et al .
4
, obtained for similar 
coupled geometries. Colored peaks stand for the magnetization 
within the oil phase, whereas colored lines limit the T2 peaks 
within wetting water. 
 
 
Fig. 8: Comparison of analytical T 2D relaxations (dash) and 
simulated T 2 distributions (solid) of 1-cp and 6-cp oil grades in 
unbounded diffusion. The simulation results are considered 
accounting for no bulk relaxation [before multiplying the output 
decay by the function exp(-t/T2B)]. T2D values are calculated from 
equation (3), for TE=0.25, 1, and 4 ms, i.e., 160, 2600, and 
41500 ms for light oil (1 cp), and 1000, 15000, and 248000 ms for 
medium oil (6 cp), respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9: Example of comparison of measured and simulated T2 
distributions in the absence of a magnetic field gradient
11
 (G=0), 
and then with (G=15 G/cm), for echo times of 1 and 2 ms. Blue 
(respectively, in color) distributions correspond to measurements 
and simulations performed at irreducible water saturation 
(respectively, 100% brine saturation). A very good agreement 
exists in terms of distribution spread for 100% brine saturation 
and T
2 peak value for both saturations, especially considering 
that the exclusively bimodal distribution of the model responsible 
for the simulated T
2 peaks sharper than in the measured T2 
distribution.. 
1.50 
NMR porosity (a.u.) 
10 10 10 10 NMR porosity (a.u.) 
T2 (ms) 
T2 (ms) 
(a) 
(b) 

--- PAGE 12 ---
12 E. TOUMELIN, C. TORRES-VERDIN, AND S. CHEN SPE 77399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10: CASE 1 simulation results. Each row states a hypothesis, symbolizes it in terms of a fluid distribution within the por e system, and 
presents the results of the corresponding simulations for three valu es of inter-echo time. The first column of graphs summarize s the 
distribution of fluids in the pore space. Dashed blue (resp. pl ain red) stems represent the porosity fractions of water (resp. oil) in the pore 
space characterized by the nominal pore sizes described in the hor izontal axis of the plot. Fluid content is indicated in poros ity units. The 
remaining columns describe the T2 distributions resulting from the simulations with a 15 G/cm gradient, and TE values of 0.25, 1, and 4 ms. 
Red-filled T2 distributions correspond to the magnetization within oil only, whereas unfilled T2 distributions represent the magnetization 
within the whole pore system (i.e., including all fluid phases). Total magnetization can be understood as the one acquired with the NMR tool. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11: CASE 2 simulation results. Refer to the caption of Fig. 10 for details on the plotting conventions. Red-filled T2 distributions 
correspond to the magnetization within oil only, whereas unfilled distributions represent the magnetization within the whole po re system (i.e., 
also including water). 
 
CASE 1: unimodal 
distribution, high T2 
 
Hypothesis 1: unimodal 
pore structure, water only 
 
 
 
Hypothesis 2: unimodal 
pore structure, partially 
filled with light oil 
CASE 2: unimodal 
distribution, average 
T2 
 
Hypothesis 1: unimodal 
pore structure, water only 
 
 
Hypothesis 2: unimodal 
pore structure, partially 
filled with medium-grade 
oil 
 
 
Hypothesis 3: coupled 
pore structure, water only 
 
 
 
Hypothesis 4: coupled 
pore structure, macro-
pores partially filled with 
medium-grade oil 
Pore diameter (mm) T2 (ms) T2 (ms) T2 (ms) 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 QUANTIFICATION OF MULTIPHASE FLUID SATURATIONS IN COMPLEX PORE GEOMETRIES 
SPE 77399 FROM SIMULATIONS OF NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE MEASUREMENTS 13 
 
 
Fig. 12: CASE 3 simulation results. Refer to the caption of Fig. 10 for details on the plotting conventions. Red-filled T2 distributions 
correspond to the oil only, whereas unfilled distributions correspond to the whole pore system (also including water). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 13: CASE 4 simulation results. Refer to the caption of Fi g. 10 for additional details on the plotting conventions. Red-fil led T2 distributions 
correspond to the oil only, whereas unfilled distributions correspond to the whole pore system (also including water). 
CASE 3: bimodal 
distribution, low/high 
T2 
 
Hypothesis 1: uncoupled 
pore structure, water only 
 
 
Hypothesis 2: uncoupled 
pore structure, macro-
pores partially filled with 
medium oil 
 
Hypothesis 3: uncoupled 
pore structure, macro-
pores partially filled with 
light oil 
 
Hypothesis 4: coupled or 
uncoupled pore structure, 
macro-pores totally filled 
with light oil 
CASE 4: bimodal 
distribution, 
average/high T2 
 
Hypothesis 1: uncoupled 
pore structure, water only 
 
 
Hypothesis 2: coupled or 
uncoupled pore structure, 
macro-pores completely 
filled with light oil 
 
 
Hypothesis 3: unimodal 
pore structure, partially 
filled with light oil 
 
 
Hypothesis 4: coupled 
pore structure, macro-
pores partially filled with 
light oil 
 
 
Hypothesis 5: uncoupled 
pore structure, macro-
pores partially filled with 
light oil